
Français
                               Family Law Act

                          Ontario REGULATION 391/97

                          CHILD SUPPORT GUIDELINES

CONSOLIDATION PERIOD: FROM JULY 26, 2024 TO THE E-LAWS CURRENCY DATE.

Last amendment: 303/24.

Legislative History: 26/00, 126/00, 446/01, 102/06, 159/07,  25/10,  463/11,
478/16, 434/17, 32/21, 303/24.

This is the English version of a bilingual regulation.

                                  CONTENTS

|OBJECTIVES                                                                     |
|1.          |OBJECTIVES                                                        |
|INTERPRETATION                                                                 |
|2.          |DEFINITIONS                                                       |
|AMOUNT OF CHILD SUPPORT                                                        |
|3.          |PRESUMPTIVE RULE                                                  |
|4.          |INCOMES OVER $150,000                                             |
|5.          |SPOUSE IN PLACE OF A PARENT                                       |
|6.          |MEDICAL AND DENTAL INSURANCE                                      |
|7.          |SPECIAL OR EXTRAORDINARY EXPENSES                                 |
|8.          |SPLIT PARENTING TIME                                              |
|9.          |SHARED PARENTING TIME                                             |
|10.         |UNDUE HARDSHIP                                                    |
|ELEMENTS OF AN ORDER FOR THE SUPPORT OF A CHILD                                |
|11.         |FORM OF PAYMENTS                                                  |
|12.         |SECURITY                                                          |
|13.         |INFORMATION TO BE SPECIFIED IN ORDER                              |
|VARIATION OF ORDERS FOR THE SUPPORT OF A CHILD                                 |
|14.         |CIRCUMSTANCES FOR VARIATION                                       |
|INCOME                                                                         |
|15.         |DETERMINATION OF ANNUAL INCOME                                    |
|16.         |CALCULATION OF ANNUAL INCOME                                      |
|17.         |PATTERN OF INCOME                                                 |
|18.         |SHAREHOLDER, DIRECTOR OR OFFICER                                  |
|19.         |IMPUTING INCOME                                                   |
|20.         |NON-RESIDENT                                                      |
|INCOME INFORMATION                                                             |
|21.         |OBLIGATION OF APPLICANT                                           |
|22.         |FAILURE TO COMPLY                                                 |
|23.         |ADVERSE INFERENCE                                                 |
|24.         |FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH COURT ORDER                                |
|24.1        |ANNUAL OBLIGATION TO PROVIDE INCOME INFORMATION                   |
|25.         |CONTINUING OBLIGATION TO PROVIDE INCOME INFORMATION               |
|PROVIDING INCOME INFORMATION FOR DOMESTIC CONTRACTS AND OTHER AGREEMENTS       |
|25.1        |ANNUAL OBLIGATION TO PROVIDE INCOME INFORMATION                   |
|SCHEDULE II |COMPARISON OF HOUSEHOLD STANDARDS OF LIVING TEST (SUBSECTION 10   |
|            |(4))                                                              |
|SCHEDULE III|ADJUSTMENTS TO INCOME (SECTION 16)                                |




                                 Objectives

OBJECTIVES
      1.  The objectives of this Regulation are,
      (a)   to establish a  fair  standard  of  support  for  children  that
    ensures that they benefit from the financial  means  of  their  parents
    and, in the case of divorce, from the financial means of  both  spouses
    after separation;
      (b)   to reduce conflict and tension between  parents  or  spouses  by
    making the calculation of child support more objective;
      (c)   to improve  the  efficiency  of  the  legal  process  by  giving
    courts, and parents and spouses, guidance  in  setting  the  levels  of
    child support and encouraging settlement; and
      (d)   to ensure consistent treatment of parents or spouses  and  their
    children who are in similar  circumstances.   O. Reg.  391/97,  s. 1;
    O. Reg. 25/10, s. 1.

                               Interpretation

DEFINITIONS
      2.  (1)  In this Regulation,
"child" means, other than in Schedule II to this Regulation,
      (a)   a child who is a dependant under the Act, or
      (b)   in cases where the Divorce Act (Canada) applies, a child of  the
    marriage under that Act; ("enfant")
"Federal  Child  Support  Guidelines"  means  the  Federal   Child   Support
 Guidelines made under the Divorce Act (Canada), as they are  amended  from
 time to time; ("Lignes directrices fédérales sur les pensions alimentaires
 pour enfants")
"income" means the  annual  income  determined  under  sections  15  to  20;
 ("revenu")
"majority of parenting time" means a period of time that  is  more  than  60
 per cent of parenting time over the course of a year; ("majorité du  temps
 parental")
"order assignee" means,
      (a)   an agency to whom an order is assigned under subsection  34 (3)
    of the Act, or
      (b)   a minister, member or agency referred to in subsection 20.1 (1)
    of the Divorce Act (Canada) to whom an order for the support of a child
    is assigned in accordance with that subsection;  ("cessionnaire  de  la
    créance alimentaire")
"parent", in a case to which  the  Act  applies,  means  a  parent  to  whom
 section 31 of the Act applies; ("père ou mère")
"spouse", in a case to which the Divorce Act (Canada) applies, means  either
 of two persons who are married to each other and includes a former spouse;
 ("époux")
"table" means,
      (a)   if the  parent  or  spouse  against  whom  an  order  is  sought
    ordinarily resides in Ontario at the time of the application, the table
    set out in the Federal Child Support Guidelines for Ontario,
      (b)   if the  parent  or  spouse  against  whom  an  order  is  sought
    ordinarily resides elsewhere in  Canada,  the  table  set  out  in  the
    Federal Child Support Guidelines for the province or territory in which
    the parent or spouse ordinarily resides at the time of the application,
      (c)   if the court is satisfied that  the  province  or  territory  in
    which the parent or spouse against whom an order is  sought  ordinarily
    resides has changed since the time of the application,  the  table  set
    out in the  Federal  Child  Support  Guidelines  for  the  province  or
    territory in which the parent or spouse ordinarily resides at the  time
    the amount of support is determined,
      (d)   if the court is satisfied that  the  parent  or  spouse  against
    whom an order is sought will, in the near future after  the  amount  of
    support  is  determined,  ordinarily  reside  in  another  province  or
    territory than the one in which he or she  ordinarily  resides  at  the
    time the amount of support is determined, the  table  set  out  in  the
    Federal Child Support Guidelines for that other province or territory,
      (e)   if the  parent  or  spouse  against  whom  an  order  is  sought
    ordinarily resides outside of Canada or if the  ordinary  residence  of
    the parent or spouse is unknown,
      (i)   the table set out in the Federal Child  Support  Guidelines  for
       Ontario if the other parent or spouse applying for the order resides
       in Ontario, or
      (ii)  the table set out in the Federal Child  Support  Guidelines  for
       the province or territory in which the parent or spouse applying for
       the order ordinarily resides.  ("table")
"universal child care benefit" means a benefit provided under section  4  of
 the Universal Child Care Benefit Act  (Canada).  ("prestation  universelle
 pour la garde d'enfant")  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 2 (1); O. Reg. 446/01, s. 1;
 O. Reg. 159/07, s. 1; O. Reg. 25/10, s. 2 (1, 2); O. Reg. 32/21, s. 1 (1-
 3); O. Reg. 303/24, s. 1 (1-3).

Application of Federal Child Support Guidelines tables
      (1.1)  Tables set out in the Federal Child Support  Guidelines  apply
for the purposes of this Regulation with necessary modifications,  including
that a reference in a table to a child shall be read as  a  reference  to  a
child as defined in this Regulation. O. Reg. 303/24, s. 1 (4).

Income Tax Act (Canada)
      (2)  Words and expressions that are used in sections  15  to  21  and
that are not defined in this section have  the  meanings  assigned  to  them
under the Income Tax Act (Canada).  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 2 (2).

Most current information
      (3)  Where, for the purposes of the  child  support  guidelines,  any
amount is determined  on  the  basis  of  specified  information,  the  most
current information must be used.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 2 (3); O. Reg. 25/10,
s. 2 (3).

Application of guidelines
      (4)  In addition to their application to  orders  for  support  of  a
child, the child support guidelines apply, with such  modifications  as  the
circumstances require, to,
       (a)    interim  orders  under  subsection  34 (1)  of  the  Act  or
    subsections 15.1 (2),  18.1  (12)  and  19  (10)  of  the  Divorce  Act
    (Canada);
      (b)   orders varying a child support order; and
      (c)   orders referred to in subsection 18.1 (15) or  19  (13)  of  the
    Divorce Act (Canada).  O. Reg.  391/97,  s. 2 (4);  O. Reg.  25/10,
    s. 2 (4); O. Reg. 32/21, s. 1 (4, 5).

                           Amount of Child Support

PRESUMPTIVE RULE
      3.  (1)  Unless otherwise provided under these guidelines, the amount
of an order for the support of  a  child  for  children  under  the  age  of
majority is,
      (a)   the amount set out in the applicable  table,  according  to  the
    number of children under the age of majority to whom the order  relates
    and the income of the parent  or  spouse  against  whom  the  order  is
    sought; and
      (b)   the amount,  if  any,  determined  under  section  7.   O. Reg.
    391/97, s. 3 (1).

Child the age of majority or over
      (2)  Unless otherwise provided under these guidelines, where a  child
to whom an order for the support of a child relates is the age  of  majority
or over, the amount of an order for the support of a child is,
      (a)   the amount determined by applying these  guidelines  as  if  the
    child were under the age of majority; or
      (b)   if the court considers that approach to  be  inappropriate,  the
    amount that it considers appropriate, having regard to  the  condition,
    means, needs and other circumstances of the  child  and  the  financial
    ability of each parent or spouse to contribute to the  support  of  the
    child.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 3 (2).

Incomes over $150,000
      4.  Where the income of the parent or spouse against  whom  an  order
for the support of a child is sought is over  $150,000,  the  amount  of  an
order for the support of a child is,
      (a)   the amount determined under section 3; or
      (b)   if the court considers that amount to be inappropriate,
      (i)   in respect of the first $150,000 of  the  parent's  or  spouse's
       income, the amount set out in the table for the number  of  children
       under the age of majority to whom the order relates,
      (ii)  in respect of the balance of the parent's  or  spouse's  income,
       the amount that the court considers appropriate,  having  regard  to
       the condition, means, needs and other circumstances of the  children
       who are entitled to support and the financial ability of each parent
       or spouse to contribute to the support of the children, and
      (iii) the amount,  if  any,  determined  under  section  7.   O. Reg.
       391/97, s. 4.

Spouse in place of a parent
      5.  Where the spouse against whom an order for the support of a child
is sought stands in the place of a parent for a child or the parent  is  not
a parent of the child as set out in section 4 of the Children's  Law  Reform
Act, the amount of the order is, in respect of that parent or  spouse,  such
amount  as  the  court  considers  appropriate,  having  regard   to   these
guidelines and any other parent's legal duty to support the child.  O. Reg.
391/97, s. 5; O. Reg. 478/16, s. 1.

Medical and dental insurance
      6.  In making an order for the support of a child, where  medical  or
dental insurance coverage for the child is available  to  either  parent  or
spouse through his or her employer or otherwise at a  reasonable  rate,  the
court may order that coverage be acquired or  continued.   O. Reg.  391/97,
s. 6.

Special or extraordinary expenses
      7.  (1)  In an order for the support of a child, the court  may,  on
the request of either parent or spouse or of an applicant under  section  33
of the Act, provide for an amount  to  cover  all  or  any  portion  of  the
following expenses, which expenses may be  estimated,  taking  into  account
the necessity of the expense in relation to the child's best  interests  and
the reasonableness of the expense in relation to the means  of  the  parents
or spouses and those of the  child  and  to  the  spending  pattern  of  the
parents or spouses in respect of the child during cohabitation:
      (a)   child care expenses incurred as  a  result  of  the  employment,
    illness, disability or education or  training  for  employment  of  the
    parent or spouse who has the majority of parenting time;
      (b)   that portion  of  the  medical  and  dental  insurance  premiums
    attributable to the child;
      (c)   health-related expenses that exceed insurance  reimbursement  by
    at least $100 annually, including orthodontic  treatment,  professional
    counselling provided by a psychologist, social worker, psychiatrist  or
    any other person, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, speech  therapy,
    prescription drugs, hearing aids, glasses and contact lenses;
       (d)    extraordinary  expenses  for  primary  or   secondary   school
    education or for any other educational programs that meet  the  child's
    particular needs;
      (e)   expenses for post-secondary education; and
      (f)   extraordinary expenses for extracurricular activities.  O. Reg.
    391/97, s. 7 (1); O. Reg. 446/01, s. 2; O. Reg. 32/21, s. 2.

Definition, "extraordinary expenses"
      (1.1)  For the purposes of clauses (1) (d) and (f),
"extraordinary expenses" means
      (a)   expenses that exceed those that the parent or spouse  requesting
    an amount for the extraordinary expenses can reasonably  cover,  taking
    into account that parent's or spouse's income and the amount  that  the
    parent or spouse would receive under the applicable table or, where the
    court has determined that the table amount is inappropriate, the amount
    that the court has otherwise determined is appropriate, or
      (b)   where clause (a) is not  applicable,  expenses  that  the  court
    considers are extraordinary taking into account,
      (i)   the amount of the expense in  relation  to  the  income  of  the
       parent or spouse requesting the amount, including  the  amount  that
       the parent or spouse would receive under the  applicable  table  or,
       where  the  court  has  determined  that   the   table   amount   is
       inappropriate, the amount that the court has otherwise determined is
       appropriate,
       (ii)   the  nature  and  number  of  the  educational  programs   and
       extracurricular activities,
      (iii) any special needs and talents of the child,
      (iv)  the overall cost of the programs and activities, and
      (v)   any other similar factors that  the  court  considers  relevant.
       O. Reg. 102/06, s. 1.

Sharing of expense
      (2)  The guiding principle in determining the amount  of  an  expense
referred to in subsection (1) is that the expense is shared by  the  parents
or spouses in proportion to their respective incomes  after  deducting  from
the expense, the contribution, if any, from  the  child.   O. Reg.  391/97,
s. 7 (2).

Subsidies, tax deductions, etc.
      (3)  Subject to subsection (4),  in  determining  the  amount  of  an
expense referred to in subsection (1), the court must take into account  any
subsidies, benefits or income tax deductions  or  credits  relating  to  the
expense, and any eligibility to claim  a  subsidy,  benefit  or  income  tax
deduction or credit relating to the expense.  O. Reg. 159/07, s. 2.

Universal child care benefit
       (4)  In  determining  the  amount  of  an  expense  referred  to  in
subsection (1), the court shall not take into account  any  universal  child
care benefit or any eligibility to claim  that  benefit.   O. Reg.  159/07,
s. 2.

Split parenting time
      8.  If there are two or more children, and each parent or spouse  has
the majority of parenting  time  with  respect  to  one  or  more  of  those
children, the amount of  an  order  for  the  support  of  a  child  is  the
difference between the amount that each parent  or  spouse  would  otherwise
pay if such an order were sought against each of the parents or spouses.  O.
Reg. 32/21, s. 3.

Shared parenting time
      9.  Where each parent or spouse exercises parenting time with respect
to a child for not less than 40 per cent of the time over the  course  of  a
year, the amount of the order for the support of a child must be  determined
by taking into account,
      (a)   the amounts set out in the applicable tables  for  each  of  the
    parents or spouses;
      (b)   the increased costs of shared parenting time arrangements; and
      (c)   the condition, means, needs  and  other  circumstances  of  each
    parent or spouse and of any child for whom support is sought.  O.  Reg.
    32/21, s. 3.

Undue hardship
      10.  (1)  On the application of either spouse or an applicant  under
section 33 of the Act, a court may award an amount of child support that  is
different from the amount determined under any of sections 3 to 5,  8  or  9
if the court finds that the parent or spouse making the request, or a  child
in respect of whom  the  request  is  made,  would  otherwise  suffer  undue
hardship.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 10 (1).

Circumstances that may cause undue hardship
      (2)  Circumstances that may cause a parent, spouse or child to suffer
undue hardship include,
      (a)   the parent or spouse has responsibility for  an  unusually  high
    level of debts reasonably incurred to support the  parents  or  spouses
    and their children during cohabitation or to earn a living;
      (b)   the parent or spouse has unusually high expenses in relation  to
    exercising parenting time with respect to a child;
      (c)   the parent or spouse has a legal duty under  a  judgment,  order
    or written separation agreement to support any person;
      (d)   the spouse has a legal duty to support a  child,  other  than  a
    child of the marriage, who is,
      (i)   under the age of majority, or
      (ii)  the age of  majority  or  over  but  is  unable,  by  reason  of
       illness, disability or other cause, to  obtain  the  necessaries  of
       life;
      (e)   the parent has a legal duty to support a child, other  than  the
    child who is the subject of this application, who is under the  age  of
    majority or who is enrolled in a full time course of education;
      (f)   the parent or spouse has a legal duty to support any person  who
    is unable to obtain the necessaries  of  life  due  to  an  illness  or
    disability.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 10 (2); O. Reg. 32/21, s. 4.

Standards of living must be considered
      (3)  Despite a determination of undue hardship under subsection  (1),
an application under that subsection must be denied by the court  if  it  is
of the opinion that the household of the parent or spouse who  claims  undue
hardship would, after determining the amount of child support under  any  of
sections 3 to 5, 8  or  9,  have  a  higher  standard  of  living  than  the
household of the other parent or spouse.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 10 (3).

Standards of living test
      (4)  In comparing standards of living for the purpose  of  subsection
(3), the court may use the comparison of household standards of living  test
set out in Schedule II.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 10 (4).

Reasonable time
      (5)  Where the court awards a different amount of child support under
subsection  (1),  it  may  specify,  in  the  order  for  child  support,  a
reasonable  time  for  the  satisfaction  of  any  obligation  arising  from
circumstances that cause undue hardship and the amount payable  at  the  end
of that time.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 10 (5).

Reasons
      (6)  Where the court makes an order for the support of a child  in  a
different amount under this section, it must record its  reasons  for  doing
so.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 10 (6).

               Elements of an Order for the Support of a Child

FORM OF PAYMENTS
      11.  Where the child support guidelines apply to  orders  made  under
the Divorce Act (Canada), section 34 of the Act applies.   O. Reg.  391/97,
s. 11; O. Reg. 25/10, s. 3.

Security
      12.  The court may require in the order for the support  of  a  child
that the amount payable under the order be paid  or  secured,  or  paid  and
secured, in the manner specified in the order.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 12.

Information to be specified in order
      13.  An order for the support of a child must include,
      (a)   the name and  birth  date  of  each  child  to  whom  the  order
    relates;
      (b)   the income of any parent or  spouse  whose  income  is  used  to
    determine the amount of the order;
      (c)   the amount determined under clause 3 (1) (a) for the number of
    children to whom the order relates;
      (d)   the amount determined under clause 3 (2) (b) for a  child  the
    age of majority or over;
      (e)   the particulars of any expense described in  subsection  7 (1),
    the child to whom the expense relates and the amount of the expense or,
    where that amount cannot be determined, the proportion to  be  paid  in
    relation to the expense;
      (f)   the date on which the lump sum or first payment is  payable  and
    the day of the month or other  time  period  on  which  all  subsequent
    payments are to be made; and
      (g)   reference  to  the  obligation  under  subsection  24.1  (1)  to
    provide updated income information no later  than  30  days  after  the
    anniversary of the date on which the order is made  in  every  year  in
    which the child is a child  within  the  meaning  of  this  Regulation,
    unless the parties agree  that  the  obligation  shall  not  apply,  as
    provided for in that subsection.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 13; O. Reg. 25/10,
    s. 4.

               Variation of Orders for the Support of a Child

CIRCUMSTANCES FOR VARIATION
      14.  For  the  purposes  of  subsection  37  (2.2)  of  the  Act  and
subsection 17 (4) of the Divorce Act (Canada),  any  one  of  the  following
constitutes a change of circumstances that gives rise to  the  making  of  a
variation order:
      1.    In the case  where  the  amount  of  child  support  includes  a
    determination  made  in  accordance  with  the  table,  any  change  in
    circumstances that would result in a different order for the support of
    a child or any provision thereof.
      2.    In the case where the amount of child support does  not  include
    a determination made in accordance with a  table,  any  change  in  the
    condition, means, needs or other  circumstances  of  either  parent  or
    spouse or of any child who is entitled to support.
      3.    In the case of an order made  under  the  Divorce  Act  (Canada)
    before May 1, 1997, the coming into force of section 15.1 of that  Act,
    enacted by section 2 of chapter 1 of the Statutes of Canada, (1997).
      4.    In the case of an order made under  the  Act,  the  coming  into
    force of subsection 33 (11) of the Act.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 14; O. Reg.
    446/01, s. 3.

                                   Income

DETERMINATION OF ANNUAL INCOME
      15.  (1)  Subject to subsection (2), a parent's or  spouse's  annual
income is determined by the court in accordance  with  sections  16  to  20.
O. Reg. 391/97, s. 15 (1).

Agreement
      (2)  Where both parents or spouses agree in  writing  on  the  annual
income of a parent or spouse, the court may consider that amount to  be  the
parent's or spouse's income for the purposes  of  these  guidelines  if  the
court thinks that the amount is  reasonable  having  regard  to  the  income
information provided under section 21.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 15 (2).

Calculation of annual income
      16.  Subject to sections 17 to 20,  a  parent's  or  spouse's  annual
income is determined using the sources of income set out under  the  heading
"Total income" in the T1 General form issued by the  Canada  Revenue  Agency
and is adjusted in accordance with Schedule III.   O. Reg.  446/01,  s. 4;
O. Reg. 102/06, s. 2.

Pattern of income
      17.  (1)  If the court is of the opinion that the determination of a
parent's or spouse's annual  income  under  section  16  would  not  be  the
fairest determination of that income, the  court  may  have  regard  to  the
parent's or spouse's income over the  last  three  years  and  determine  an
amount that is fair and reasonable  in  light  of  any  pattern  of  income,
fluctuation in income or receipt of  a  non-recurring  amount  during  those
years.  O. Reg. 446/01, s. 5.

Non-recurring losses
      (2)  Where a parent or spouse has incurred a non-recurring capital or
business investment loss, the court may, if it is of the  opinion  that  the
determination of the parent's or spouse's annual  income  under  section  16
would not provide the fairest determination of  the  annual  income,  choose
not to apply sections 6 and 7 of Schedule III, and adjust the amount of  the
loss,  including  related  expenses  and  carrying  charges   and   interest
expenses, to arrive at such  amount  as  the  court  considers  appropriate.
O. Reg. 391/97, s. 17 (2).

Shareholder, director or officer
      18.  (1)  Where a parent or spouse is  a  shareholder,  director  or
officer of a corporation and the court is of the opinion that the amount  of
the parent's or spouse's annual income as determined under section  16  does
not fairly reflect all the money available to the parent or spouse  for  the
payment of child support, the court may consider  the  situations  described
in section 17 and determine  the  parent's  or  spouse's  annual  income  to
include,
      (a)   all or part of the pre-tax income of  the  corporation,  and  of
    any corporation that is related  to  that  corporation,  for  the  most
    recent taxation year; or
      (b)   an amount commensurate with the  services  that  the  parent  or
    spouse provides to the corporation, provided that the amount  does  not
    exceed the corporation's pre-tax income.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 18 (1).

Adjustment to corporation's pre-tax income
      (2)  In determining the pre-tax  income  of  a  corporation  for  the
purposes  of  subsection  (1),  all  amounts  paid  by  the  corporation  as
salaries, wages or management fees, or other payments or benefits, to or  on
behalf of persons with whom the corporation does not deal  at  arm's  length
must  be  added  to  the  pre-tax  income,  unless  the  parent  or   spouse
establishes  that  the  payments  were  reasonable  in  the   circumstances.
O. Reg. 391/97, s. 18 (2).

Imputing income
      19.  (1)  The court may impute such amount of income to a parent  or
spouse  as  it   considers   appropriate   in   the   circumstances,   which
circumstances include,
       (a)    the  parent  or  spouse  is  intentionally  under-employed  or
    unemployed, other than where the under-employment  or  unemployment  is
    required by the needs of any child or by the reasonable educational  or
    health needs of the parent or spouse;
       (b)    the  parent  or  spouse  is  exempt  from  paying  federal  or
    provincial income tax;
      (c)   the parent or spouse lives  in  a  country  that  has  effective
    rates of income tax that are significantly lower than those in Canada;
      (d)   it appears that income has been diverted which would affect  the
    level of child support to be determined under these guidelines;
      (e)   the parent's or spouse's property is not reasonably utilized  to
    generate income;
      (f)   the parent or spouse has failed to  provide  income  information
    when under a legal obligation to do so;
      (g)   the parent or spouse unreasonably deducts expenses from income;
      (h)   the parent or spouse derives a  significant  portion  of  income
    from dividends, capital gains or other sources  that  are  taxed  at  a
    lower rate than employment or business income or that are  exempt  from
    tax; and
      (i)   the parent or spouse is a beneficiary under a trust  and  is  or
    will be in receipt of income or other benefits from the trust.  O. Reg.
    391/97, s. 19 (1); O. Reg. 446/01, s. 6.

Reasonableness of expenses
      (2)  For the purpose of clause (1)  (g),  the  reasonableness  of  an
expense deduction is  not  solely  governed  by  whether  the  deduction  is
permitted under the Income Tax Act (Canada).  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 19 (2).

Non-resident
      20.  (1)  Subject to subsection (2), where a parent or spouse  is  a
non-resident  of  Canada,  the  parent's  or  spouse's  annual   income   is
determined as though the  parent  or  spouse  were  a  resident  of  Canada.
O. Reg. 102/06, s. 3.

Non-resident taxed at higher rates
      (2)  Where a parent or spouse is a non-resident of Canada and resides
in a country that has effective rates of income tax that  are  significantly
higher than those applicable in the  province  or  territory  in  which  the
other parent or spouse habitually  resides,  the  non-resident  parent's  or
spouse's annual income is the  amount  which  the  court  determines  to  be
appropriate taking the higher rates into  consideration.   O. Reg.  102/06,
s. 3; O. Reg. 32/21, s. 5.

                             Income Information

OBLIGATION OF APPLICANT
      21.  (1)  A parent or spouse who is applying for an  order  for  the
support of a child and whose income information is  necessary  to  determine
the amount of the order must include with the application,
      (a)   a copy of every personal income tax return filed by  the  parent
    or spouse including any materials that were filed with the  return  for
    each of the three most recent taxation years;
      (b)   a copy of every notice of assessment and reassessment issued  to
    the parent or spouse for each of the three most recent taxation years;
      (c)   where the parent or spouse  is  an  employee,  the  most  recent
    statement of earnings indicating the total earnings paid in the year to
    date, including overtime, or, where such a statement is not provided by
    the employer, a letter from the parent's or spouse's  employer  setting
    out that information including the parent's or spouse's rate of  annual
    salary or remuneration;
      (d)   where the parent or spouse is self-employed, for the three  most
    recent taxation years,
      (i)   the financial statements of the parent's  or  spouse's  business
       or professional practice, other than a partnership, and
      (ii)   a  statement  showing  a  breakdown  of  all  salaries,  wages,
       management fees or other payments or benefits paid to, or on  behalf
       of, persons or corporations with whom the parent or spouse does  not
       deal at arm's length;
      (e)   where the parent or  spouse  is  a  partner  in  a  partnership,
    confirmation of the parent's or spouse's  income  and  draw  from,  and
    capital in, the partnership for its three most recent taxation years;
      (f)   where the parent or  spouse  controls  a  corporation,  for  its
    three most recent taxation years,
       (i)    the  financial  statements  of   the   corporation   and   its
       subsidiaries, and
      (ii)   a  statement  showing  a  breakdown  of  all  salaries,  wages,
       management fees or other payments or benefits paid to, or on  behalf
       of, persons or corporations with whom  the  corporation,  and  every
       related corporation, does not deal at arm's length;
      (g)   where the parent or spouse is a beneficiary  under  a  trust,  a
    copy of the trust settlement agreement and copies of the trust's  three
    most recent financial statements; and
      (h)   in addition to any  information  that  must  be  included  under
    clauses (c) to (g), where the parent or  spouse  receives  income  from
    employment   insurance,   social   assistance,   a   pension,   workers
    compensation, disability payments or any other source, the most  recent
    statement of income indicating the total  amount  of  income  from  the
    applicable source during the current year or, if such  a  statement  is
    not provided, a letter  from  the  appropriate  authority  stating  the
    required information.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 21 (1); O. Reg. 446/01, s. 7;
    O. Reg. 25/10, s. 5.

Obligation of respondent
      (2)  A parent or spouse who is served  with  an  application  for  an
order for the support of a child and whose income information  is  necessary
to determine the amount of  the  order,  must,  within  30  days  after  the
application is served if the parent or  spouse  resides  in  Canada  or  the
United States or within 60 days if the parent or spouse  resides  elsewhere,
or such other time limit as the court specifies, provide the court, as  well
as the other spouse, an applicant under section 33 of the Act or  the  order
assignee with the documents referred to in subsection (1).  O. Reg. 391/97,
s. 21 (2).

Special expenses or undue hardship
      (3)  Where, in the course of proceedings in respect of an application
for an order for the support of a child, a  parent  or  spouse  requests  an
amount to cover expenses referred to in subsection 7 (1)  or  pleads  undue
hardship, the parent or spouse who would be receiving the  amount  of  child
support must, within 30 days after the amount is sought  or  undue  hardship
is pleaded if the parent or spouse resides in Canada or  the  United  States
or within 60 days if the parent or spouse resides elsewhere, or  such  other
time limit as the court specifies, provide the court and  the  other  parent
or spouse with the  documents  referred  to  in  subsection  (1).   O. Reg.
391/97, s. 21 (3).

Income over $150,000
      (4)  Where, in the course of proceedings in respect of an application
for an order for the support of a child, it is established that  the  income
of the parent or spouse who would be paying the amount of child  support  is
greater than $150,000, the other parent  or  spouse  must,  within  30  days
after the income is established to be greater than  $150,000  if  the  other
parent or spouse resides in Canada or the United States or  within  60  days
if the other parent or spouse resides elsewhere, or such  other  time  limit
as the court specifies, provide the court and the  other  parent  or  spouse
with  the  documents  referred  to  in  subsection  (1).   O. Reg.  391/97,
s. 21 (4).

Failure to comply
      22.  (1)  Where a parent or spouse fails to comply with section  21,
the other spouse, an applicant under section 33  of  the  Act  or  an  order
assignee may apply,
      (a)   to have the application for an order for the support of a  child
    set down for a hearing, or move for judgment; or
      (b)   for an order requiring  the  parent  or  spouse  who  failed  to
    comply to provide the court, as well as the other parent or  spouse  or
    order assignee, as the  case  may  be,  with  the  required  documents.
    O. Reg. 391/97, s. 22 (1).

Costs of the proceedings
      (2)  Where a court makes an order under clause (1) (a) or  (b),  the
court may award costs in favour of the other  spouse,  the  applicant  under
section 33 of the Act or an order  assignee  up  to  an  amount  that  fully
compensates the other spouse, the applicant or order assignee for all  costs
incurred in the proceedings.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 22 (2).

Adverse inference
      23.  Where the court proceeds  to  a  hearing  on  the  basis  of  an
application under  clause  22  (1)  (a),  the  court  may  draw  an  adverse
inference against the parent or spouse  who  failed  to  comply  and  impute
income to that parent or spouse in such amount as it considers  appropriate.
 O. Reg. 391/97, s. 23.

Failure to comply with court order
      24.  Where a parent or spouse fails to comply with an order issued on
the basis of an application under clause 22 (1) (b), the court may,
      (a)   strike out any of the parent's or spouse's pleadings;
      (b)   make a contempt order against the parent or spouse;
      (c)   proceed to a hearing, in the course of  which  it  may  draw  an
    adverse inference against the parent or spouse  and  impute  income  to
    that parent or spouse in such amount as it considers appropriate; and
      (d)   award costs in favour of the other spouse,  an  applicant  under
    section 33 of the Act or an order assignee up to an amount  that  fully
    compensates the other spouse, the applicant or assignee for  all  costs
    incurred in the proceedings.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 24.

Annual obligation to provide income information
      24.1  (1)  Every person whose income or other financial  information
is used to determine the amount of an order  for  the  support  of  a  child
shall, no later than 30 days after the anniversary of the date on which  the
order was made in every year in which  the  child  is  a  child  within  the
meaning of this Regulation, provide  every  party  to  the  order  with  the
following, unless the parties have agreed otherwise:
      1.    For the most recent taxation year, a copy of the person's,
      i.    personal income tax return, including any  materials  that  were
       filed with the return, and
      ii.   notice of assessment and, if any, notice of reassessment.
      2.    As applicable, any current information in writing about,
      i.    the status and amount of any  expenses  included  in  the  order
       pursuant to subsection 7 (1), and
      ii.   any loan, scholarship or bursaries the  child  has  received  or
       will receive in the coming year  that  affect  or  will  affect  the
       expenses referred to in subparagraph i.  O. Reg. 25/10, s. 6.

Notices of assessment
      (2)  If the person has not received his or her notice  of  assessment
or notice of reassessment for the most recent  taxation  year  by  the  date
referred to in subsection (1), the person shall provide every party  to  the
order with a copy of the  notice  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  person
receives the notice.  O. Reg. 25/10, s. 6.

Change in address
      (3)  If the address at which a party receives documents changes,  the
party shall, at least 30 days before the next anniversary  of  the  date  on
which the order was made, give written notice of his or her updated  address
information to every person required to provide  documents  and  information
under subsection (1).  O. Reg. 25/10, s. 6.

Failure to comply
      (4)  If a person required to provide a document or information  under
this section fails to do so, a court may, on application by  the  party  who
did not receive the document  or  information,  make  one  or  more  of  the
following orders:
      1.    An order finding the person to be in contempt of court.
      2.    An order awarding costs in favour of  the  applicant  up  to  an
    amount that fully compensates the applicant for all costs  incurred  in
    the proceedings.
      3.    An order  requiring  the  person  to  provide  the  document  or
    information to,
      i.    the court,
      ii.   the applicant, and
      iii.  any other party to whom the person did not provide the  document
       or information when required to do so.  O. Reg. 25/10, s. 6.

Exception
      (5)  Subsection (4) does not apply if the person who fails to provide
the document or information is a child who is not a party to the  order  for
support.  O. Reg. 25/10, s. 6.

Transition
      (6)  In the case of an order to which subsection (1) applies that  is
in existence on the day section 5 of Ontario  Regulation  25/10  comes  into
force, if the first date by  which  a  person  must  provide  documents  and
information under that subsection occurs less than six months after the  day
on which the person provided documents and  information  under  section  25,
the person is not  required  to  provide  documents  and  information  under
subsection (1) in the first year in which he or  she  would  otherwise  have
been required to provide them.  O. Reg. 25/10, s. 6.

Continuing obligation to provide income information
      25.  (1)  Every parent or spouse  against  whom  an  order  for  the
support of a child has been made must, on the written request of  the  other
spouse or the person or agency entitled to payment under the order not  more
than once a year after the making of the order and as long as the  child  is
a child within the meaning of this Regulation, provide  that  other  spouse,
or the person or agency entitled to payment under the order, with,
      (a)   the documents referred to in subsection 21 (1) for  any  of  the
    three most recent taxation years for which the parent or spouse has not
    previously provided the documents;
      (b)   as applicable, any current information in writing about,
      (i)   the status and amount of any  expenses  included  in  the  order
       pursuant to subsection 7 (1), and
      (ii)  any loan, scholarship or bursaries the child has  received  that
       affect the expenses referred to in subclause (i); and
      (c)   as applicable, any current information, in  writing,  about  the
    circumstances relied on by  the  court  in  a  determination  of  undue
    hardship.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 25 (1); O. Reg. 25/10, s. 7 (1, 2).

Below minimum income
      (2)  Where a court has determined that the parent or  spouse  against
whom an order for the support of a child is sought  does  not  have  to  pay
child support because his or her income level is below  the  minimum  amount
required for application of the tables, that parent or spouse must,  on  the
written request of the other spouse or the applicant  under  section  33  of
the Act, not more than once a year after the determination and  as  long  as
the child is a child within the meaning  of  this  Regulation,  provide  the
other spouse or the applicant with the documents referred to  in  subsection
21 (1) for any of the three most recent taxation years for which the parent
or spouse has not  previously  provided  the  documents.   O. Reg.  391/97,
s. 25 (2); O. Reg. 25/10, s. 7 (3).

Obligation of receiving parent or spouse
      (3)  Where the income information of the parent or spouse  in  favour
of whom an order for the support of a child is made  is  used  to  determine
the amount of the order, the parent or spouse must, not  more  than  once  a
year after the making of the order and as long  as  the  child  is  a  child
within the meaning of this Regulation, on the written request of  the  other
parent or spouse, provide the other parent or spouse with the documents  and
information referred to in subsection (1).   O. Reg.  391/97,  s. 25 (3);
O. Reg. 25/10, s. 7 (4).

Information requests
      (4)  Where a parent or spouse requests  information  from  the  other
parent or spouse under  any  of  subsections  (1)  to  (3)  and  the  income
information of the requesting parent or spouse  is  used  to  determine  the
amount of the order for the support of a child,  the  requesting  parent  or
spouse must include the documents and information referred to in  subsection
(1) with the request.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 25 (4).

Time limit
      (5)  A parent or spouse who receives a  request  made  under  any  of
subsections (1) to (3) must provide the required documents  within  30  days
after the request's receipt if the parent or spouse  resides  in  Canada  or
the United States and within 60 days after  the  request's  receipt  if  the
parent or spouse resides elsewhere.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 25 (5).

Deemed receipt
      (6)  A request made under any of subsections (1) to (3) is deemed  to
have been received 10 days after it is sent.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 25 (6).

Failure to comply
      (7)  A court may, on application by either spouse, an applicant under
section 33 of the Act or an order assignee, where the parent or  spouse  has
failed to comply with any of subsections (1) to (3),
      (a)   consider the parent or spouse to be in  contempt  of  court  and
    award costs in favour of the applicant  up  to  an  amount  that  fully
    compensates the applicant for all costs incurred in the proceedings; or
      (b)   make an order requiring the parent  or  spouse  to  provide  the
    required documents to the court,  as  well  as  to  the  spouse,  order
    assignee or applicant under section 33 of the Act, as the case may  be.
    O. Reg. 391/97, s. 25 (7).

Unenforceable provision
      (8)  A provision in a judgment,  order  or  agreement  purporting  to
limit a parent's or spouse's obligation  to  provide  documents  under  this
section is unenforceable.  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 25 (8).

  Providing Income Information for Domestic Contracts and Other Agreements

ANNUAL OBLIGATION TO PROVIDE INCOME INFORMATION
      25.1  (1)  Every person whose income or other financial  information
is used to determine the amount  of  a  child  support  obligation  under  a
domestic contract or other written agreement shall, no later  than  30  days
after the anniversary of the date on which the  contract  or  agreement  was
entered into in every year in which the child is a child within the  meaning
of this Regulation, provide every party to the contract  or  agreement  with
the following, unless the  parties  have  agreed  otherwise  in  a  domestic
contract or other agreement:
      1.    For the most recent taxation year, a copy of the person's,
      i.    personal income tax return, including any  materials  that  were
       filed with the return, and
      ii.   notice of assessment and, if any, notice of reassessment.
      2.    If the contract or agreement provides for the payment of any  of
    the expenses referred to in clauses 7  (1)  (a)  to  (f),  any  current
    information in writing about,
      i.    the status and amount of the expenses, and
      ii.   any loan, scholarship or bursaries the  child  has  received  or
       will receive in the coming year  that  affect  or  will  affect  the
       expenses referred to in subparagraph i.  O. Reg. 25/10, s. 8.

Notices of assessment
      (2)  If the person has not received his or her notice  of  assessment
or notice of reassessment for the most recent  taxation  year  by  the  date
referred to in subsection (1), the person shall provide every party  to  the
contract or agreement with a copy of the notice as soon  as  possible  after
the person receives the notice.  O. Reg. 25/10, s. 8.

Change in address
      (3)  If the address at which a party  to  the  domestic  contract  or
agreement receives documents changes, the party  shall,  at  least  30  days
before the next anniversary of the date on which the contract  or  agreement
was entered into,  give  written  notice  of  his  or  her  updated  address
information to every person required to provide  documents  and  information
under subsection (1).  O. Reg. 25/10, s. 8.

Failure to comply
      (4)  If a person required to provide a document or information  under
this section fails to do so, a court may, on application by the  person  who
did not receive the document  or  information,  make  one  or  more  of  the
following orders:
      1.    An order awarding costs in favour of  the  applicant  up  to  an
    amount that fully compensates the applicant for all costs  incurred  in
    the proceedings.
      2.    An order  requiring  the  person  to  provide  the  document  or
    information to,
      i.    the court,
      ii.   the applicant, and
      iii.  any other party  to  the  domestic  contract  or  other  written
       agreement to whom  the  person  did  not  provide  the  document  or
       information when required to do so.  O. Reg. 25/10, s. 8.

Exception
      (5)  Subsection (4) does not apply if the person who fails to provide
the document or information is a child who is not a party  to  the  domestic
contract or other written agreement.  O. Reg. 25/10, s. 8.

Transition
      (6)  This section applies in respect of a domestic contract or  other
written agreement only if the contract or agreement was entered into  on  or
after the day section 7  of  Ontario  Regulation  25/10  comes  into  force.
O. Reg. 25/10, s. 8.
      26.  Omitted (provides for coming into force of  provisions  of  this
Regulation).  O. Reg. 391/97, s. 26.
Note:  The child support guidelines come into force with  respect  to  cases
to which the Family Law Act applies on  the  day  the  Uniform  Federal  and
Provincial Child Support  Guidelines  Act,  1997  is  proclaimed  in  force.
Proclamation date is December 1, 1997.  See: O. Reg. 391/97, s. 26 (1).
Note:  The child support guidelines come into force with  respect  to  cases
to which the Divorce Act (Canada) applies on  the  day  the  guidelines  are
specified by order of the Governor in  Council  as  "applicable  guidelines"
within the meaning of that Act under subsection 2 (5) of  that  Act.   See:
O. Reg. 391/97, s. 26 (2).

                  Schedule I Revoked: O. Reg. 303/24, s. 2.

                                 Schedule II
    COMPARISON OF HOUSEHOLD STANDARDS OF LIVING TEST (Subsection 10 (4))

DEFINITIONS
      1.  The definitions in this section apply in this Schedule.
"child" means,
      (a)   in cases where the Divorce Act (Canada) applies, a child of  the
    marriage or a child who,
      (i)   is under the age of majority, or
      (ii)  is the age of majority or over  but  is  unable,  by  reason  of
       illness, disability or other cause  to  obtain  the  necessaries  of
       life, or
      (b)   in cases where the Act applies,  a  child  who  is  a  dependant
    under the Act; ("enfant")
"household" means a parent or  spouse  and  any  of  the  following  persons
 residing with him or her,
      (a)   any person who has a legal duty to support the parent or  spouse
    or whom the parent or spouse has a legal duty to support,
      (b)   any person who shares living expenses with the parent or  spouse
    or from whom the  parent  or  spouse  otherwise  receives  an  economic
    benefit as a result of living with that person, if the court  considers
    it reasonable for that person to be considered part of  the  household,
    and
      (c)   any child whom the parent or spouse or the person  described  in
    clause (a) or (b) has a legal duty to support; ("ménage")
"taxable income" means  the  annual  taxable  income  determined  using  the
 calculations required to determine "Taxable Income" in the T1 General form
 issued by the Canada Revenue Agency. ("revenu imposable")

Test
      2.  The comparison of  household  standards  of  living  test  is  as
follows:
STEP 1
            Establish the annual income of each person in each household  by
applying the formula
                                  A - B - C
            where
      A     is the person's income determined under sections  15  to  20  of
    this Regulation,
      B     is the federal and provincial  taxes  payable  on  the  person's
    taxable income, and
      C     is the person's source deductions for premiums  paid  under  the
    Employment Insurance Act and contributions made to the  Canada  Pension
    Plan and the Quebec Pension Plan.
            Where the information on which to base the income  determination
is not provided, the court may impute income  in  the  amount  it  considers
appropriate.
STEP 2
            Adjust the annual income of each person in each household by
      (a)   deducting the following amounts, calculated on an annual basis:
      (i)   any amount relied on by the court as a factor that  resulted  in
       a determination of undue hardship, except any amount attributable to
       the support of a member of the household that is not incurred due to
       a disability or serious illness of that member,
      (ii)  the amount that would otherwise be  payable  by  the  person  in
       respect of a child to whom the order relates,  if  the  pleading  of
       undue hardship was not made,
      (A)   under the applicable table, or
      (B)   as considered by the court to be appropriate,  where  the  court
           considers the table amount to be inappropriate,
      (iii) any amount of support  that  is  paid  by  the  person  under  a
       judgment, order or written separation agreement, except,
      (A)   an amount already deducted under subclause (i), and
      (B)   an amount paid by the person in respect of a child to  whom  the
           order referred to in subclause (ii) relates; and
      (b)   adding the following amounts, calculated on an annual basis:
      (i)   any amount that would otherwise be receivable by the  person  in
       respect of a child to whom the order relates,  if  the  pleading  of
       undue hardship was not made,
      (A)   under the applicable table, or
      (B)   as considered by the court to be appropriate,  where  the  court
           considers the table amount to be inappropriate, and
      (ii)  any amount of child support that the  person  has  received  for
       any child under a judgment, order or written separation agreement.
STEP 3
            Add the amounts of adjusted annual income for  all  the  persons
in  each  household  to  determine  the  total  household  income  for  each
household.
STEP 4
            Determine the applicable low-income  measures  amount  for  each
household based on the following:
|Household Size  |Household Composition            |Low-income Measures Amount |
|                |                                 |($)                        |
|One person      |One adult                        |10,382                     |
|Two persons     |Two adults                       |14,535                     |
|Two persons     |One adult and one child          |14,535                     |
|Three persons   |Three adults                     |18,688                     |
|Three persons   |Two adults and one child         |17,649                     |
|Three persons   |One adult and two children       |17,649                     |
|Four persons    |Four adults                      |22,840                     |
|Four persons    |Three adults and one child       |21,802                     |
|Four persons    |Two adults and two children      |20,764                     |
|Four persons    |One adult and three children     |20,764                     |
|Five persons    |Five adults                      |26,993                     |
|Five persons    |Four adults and one child        |25,955                     |
|Five persons    |Three adults and two children    |24,917                     |
|Five persons    |Two adults and three children    |23,879                     |
|Five persons    |One adult and four children      |23,879                     |
|Six persons     |Six adults                       |31,145                     |
|Six persons     |Five adults and one child        |30,108                     |
|Six persons     |Four adults and two children     |29,070                     |
|Six persons     |Three adults and three children  |28,031                     |
|Six persons     |Two adults and four children     |26,993                     |
|Six persons     |One adult and five children      |26,993                     |
|Seven persons   |Seven adults                     |34,261                     |
|Seven persons   |Six adults and one child         |33,222                     |
|Seven persons   |Five adults and two children     |32,184                     |
|Seven persons   |Four adults and three children   |31,146                     |
|Seven persons   |Three adults and four children   |30,108                     |
|Seven persons   |Two adults and five children     |29,070                     |
|Seven persons   |One adult and six children       |29,070                     |
|Eight persons   |Eight adults                     |38,413                     |
|Eight persons   |Seven adults and one child       |37,375                     |
|Eight persons   |Six adults and two children      |36,337                     |
|Eight persons   |Five adults and three children   |35,299                     |
|Eight persons   |Four adults and four children    |34,261                     |
|Eight persons   |Three adults and five children   |33,222                     |
|Eight persons   |Two adults and six children      |32,184                     |
|Eight persons   |One adult and seven children     |32,184                     |


STEP 5
            Divide the household income amount (Step 3)  by  the  low-income
measures  amount  (Step  4)  to  get  a  household  income  ratio  for  each
household.
STEP 6
            Compare the household income ratios.   The  household  that  has
the higher ratio has the higher standard of living.
  O. Reg. 391/97, Sched. II; O. Reg. 446/01, ss. 8, 9; O. Reg. 102/06, s. 5;
                                 O. Reg. 25/10, s. 10; O. Reg. 478/16, s. 3.

                                Schedule III
                     ADJUSTMENTS TO INCOME (Section 16)

EMPLOYMENT EXPENSES
      1.  Where the parent or  spouse  is  an  employee,  the  parent's  or
spouse's  applicable  employment  expenses  described   in   the   following
provisions of the Income Tax Act (Canada) are deducted:
      (a)   Revoked:  O. Reg. 446/01, s. 10 (1).
      (b)   paragraph 8 (1) (d) concerning expenses of teacher's  exchange
    fund contribution;
      (c)   paragraph 8 (1) (e) concerning expenses of railway employees;
      (d)   paragraph 8 (1) (f) concerning sales expenses;
      (e)   paragraph 8 (1) (g) concerning transport employee's expenses;
      (f)   paragraph 8 (1) (h) concerning travel expenses;
      (f.1) paragraph 8 (1) (h.1) concerning motor vehicle travel expenses;
      (g)   paragraph 8 (1) (i) concerning  dues  and  other  expenses  of
    performing duties;
      (h)   paragraph 8 (l) (j)  concerning  motor  vehicle  and  aircraft
    costs;
       (i)    paragraph  8  (1)  (l.1)  concerning   Canada   Pension   Plan
    contributions and Employment Insurance Act (Canada)  premiums  paid  in
    respect of another employee who acts as an assistant or substitute  for
    the parent or spouse;
      (j)   paragraph 8 (1) (n) concerning salary reimbursement;
      (k)   paragraph 8 (1) (o) concerning forfeited amounts;
      (l)   paragraph 8 (1) (p) concerning musical instrument costs; and
      (m)   paragraph 8 (1) (q) concerning artists' employment expenses.

Child support
      2.  Deduct any child support received that is included  to  determine
total income in the T1 General form issued by the Canada Revenue Agency.

Support other than child support and universal child care benefit
      3.  To calculate income for the  purpose  of  determining  an  amount
under an applicable table, deduct,
      (a)   the support, not including  child  support,  received  from  the
    other parent or spouse; and
      (b)   any universal child care benefit that is included  to  determine
    the parent or spouse's total income in the T1 General  form  issued  by
    the Canada Revenue Agency.

Special or extraordinary expenses
      3.1  To calculate income for the purpose  of  determining  an  amount
under section 7 of this Regulation, deduct the support, not including  child
support, paid to the other parent or spouse and,  as  applicable,  make  the
following adjustment in respect of universal child care benefits:
      (a)   deduct benefits that are included to  determine  the  parent  or
    spouse's total income in the T1  General  form  issued  by  the  Canada
    Revenue  Agency  and  that  are  for  a  child  for  whom  special   or
    extraordinary expenses are not being requested; or
      (b)   include benefits that are not included to determine  the  parent
    or spouse's total income in the T1 General form issued  by  the  Canada
    Revenue Agency and that are received by the  parent  or  spouse  for  a
    child for whom special or extraordinary expenses are being requested.

Social assistance
      4.  Deduct any  amount  of  social  assistance  income  that  is  not
attributable to the parent or spouse.

Dividends from taxable Canadian corporations
      5.  Replace the taxable amount of  dividends  from  taxable  Canadian
corporations received by the parent or spouse by the actual amount of  those
dividends received by the parent or spouse.

Capital gains and capital losses
      6.  Replace the taxable capital gains  realized  in  a  year  by  the
parent or spouse by the actual amount  of  capital  gains  realized  by  the
parent or spouse in excess  of  the  parent's  or  spouse's  actual  capital
losses in that year.

Business investment losses
      7.  Deduct the actual amount of business investment  losses  suffered
by the parent or spouse during the year.

Carrying charges
      8.  Deduct the parent's or spouse's  carrying  charges  and  interest
expenses that are paid by the parent or spouse and that would be  deductible
under the Income Tax Act (Canada).

Net self-employment income
      9.  Where the parent's or  spouse's  net  self-employment  income  is
determined  by  deducting  an  amount  for  salaries,  benefits,  wages   or
management fees, or other payments, paid to or on  behalf  of  persons  with
whom the parent or spouse does  not  deal  at  arm's  length,  include  that
amount, unless the parent or  spouse  establishes  that  the  payments  were
necessary to earn the self-employment income  and  were  reasonable  in  the
circumstances.

Additional amount
      10.  Where the parent or spouse reports income  from  self-employment
that, in accordance with sections 34.1  and  34.2  of  the  Income  Tax  Act
(Canada), includes an additional amount earned in  a  prior  period,  deduct
the amount earned in the prior period, net of reserves.

Capital cost allowance for property
      11.  Include the parent's or  spouse's  deduction  for  an  allowable
capital cost allowance with respect to real property.

Partnership or sole proprietorship income
      12.  Where the parent or spouse earns income through a partnership or
sole proprietorship, deduct any amount included in income that  is  properly
required  by  the  partnership  or  sole  proprietorship  for  purposes   of
capitalization.

Employee stock options with a Canadian-controlled private corporation
      13.  (1)  Where the parent or spouse has received,  as  an  employee
benefit,  options  to  purchase  shares  of  a  Canadian-controlled  private
corporation or a publicly traded corporation that is  subject  to  the  same
tax treatment with reference  to  stock  options  as  a  Canadian-controlled
private corporation, and has exercised those options during  the  year,  add
the difference between the value of the shares at the time the  options  are
exercised and the amount paid by the parent or spouse  for  the  shares  and
any amount paid by the parent or spouse to acquire the options  to  purchase
the shares, to the income for the year in which the options are exercised.

Disposal of shares
      (2)  If the parent or spouse has disposed  of  the  shares  during  a
year, deduct from the income for that year the difference  determined  under
subsection (1).
     O. Reg. 391/97, Sched. III; O. Reg. 26/00, s. 1; O. Reg. 446/01, s. 10;
           O. Reg. 102/06, s. 6; O. Reg. 159/07, s. 3; O. Reg. 25/10, s. 11.

Français

Back to top
