                  COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

       CITATION: Letestu Estate v. Ritlyn Investments Limited, 2017 ONCA 442
                                                              DATE: 20170601
                                                            DOCKET: C62806

                  LaForme, van Rensburg and Huscroft JJ.A.

BETWEEN


                   The Estate of Armand Letestu, deceased,
                 by its Litigation Guardian, Christopher Letestu
                                                              Plaintiff (Appellant)



                                      and




                           Ritlyn Investments Limited

                                                        Defendant (Respondent)



Barry A. Percival Q.C., Daniel Zacks and Joel P. McCoy, for the appellant

Kenneth J. Raddatz and Kieran C. Dickson, for the respondent

Heard: May 18, 2017

On appeal from the judgment of Justice James W. Sloan of the Superior Court of
Justice, dated October 19, 2016, with reasons reported at 2016 ONSC 6540.
                                      Page: 2


By the Court:

OVERVIEW

[1]     In December 2011 the appellant estate commenced an action for

damages for injuries the deceased suffered when he allegedly slipped and fell

over a damaged carpet in his residential rental unit. The action claims $500,000

in damages from the respondent, the owner and manager of the apartment

building. It was commenced 23 months after the alleged slip and fall.

[2]     The respondent, on the eve of trial, moved under rule 21 of the Rules of

Civil Procedure to strike the claim on the basis the Superior Court had no

jurisdiction to hear it.

[3]     The motion judge dismissed the estate’s action, after concluding the claim

fell within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Landlord and Tenant Board (the

“Board”) over the subject matter, and was outside the one-year limitation period

prescribed under s. 29(2) of the Residential Tenancies Act, 2006, S.O. 2006, c.

17 (the “Act”). The estate appeals.

[4]     For the reasons that follow, we conclude the motion judge erred in law in

his determination that the Superior Court lacks jurisdiction over the claim

because it was commenced after the one-year limitation period under the Act had

expired. As we explain, a plain reading of the relevant statutory provisions leads

to the contrary conclusion.
                                                 Page: 3


ANALYSIS

(1)         The Superior Court Has Jurisdiction over the Claim

[5]         A plain reading of the four relevant provisions of the Act demonstrates the

Act does not grant the Board exclusive jurisdiction over all claims of non-repair

against a landlord. In this case, the Superior Court has jurisdiction.

[6]         Section 29(1) of the Act provides for a tenant or former tenant of a rental

unit to apply to the Board for a variety of orders, including that the landlord

breached an obligation under s. 20(1) (the landlord’s duty to repair).

[7]         Section 168(2) provides that the Board “has exclusive jurisdiction to

determine all applications under the Act and with respect to all matters in which

jurisdiction is conferred on it by this Act.”

[8]         Section 207(1) provides that the Board may, “where it otherwise has the

jurisdiction, order the payment to any given person of an amount of money up to

the greater of $10,000 and the monetary jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court.”1

[9]         Section 207(2) of the Act, provides that “a person entitled to apply under

the Act but whose claim exceeds the Board’s monetary jurisdiction may

commence a proceeding in [court] for an order requiring payment of that sum




1
    The monetary jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court is $25,000
                                      Page: 4


and…the court may exercise any power that the Board could have exercised if

the proceeding had been before the Board and within its monetary jurisdiction”.

[10]   Thus, the Act does not grant the Board exclusive jurisdiction over all

claims of non-repair against a landlord. Rather, the Board has jurisdiction over a

tenant’s or former tenant’s claim for damages (as well as other claims within the

Board’s authority) where the “essential character of the claim” is for non-repair

and within its monetary jurisdiction: Mackie v. Toronto (City) and Toronto

Community Housing Corporation, 2010 ONSC 3801, [2010] O.J. No. 2852. The

Board’s jurisdiction, however, is not exclusive by virtue of s. 207(2): Kaiman v.

Graham, 2009 ONCA 77, 245 O.A.C. 130, at para. 15.

[11]   Because the estate claimed damages exceeding the monetary jurisdiction

of the Small Claims Court, and therefore exceeded the jurisdiction of the Board,

there was no question that the appellants were entitled to commence their

proceeding in the Superior Court. And, through the operation of s. 207(2), the

court would be able to make any order the Board could have made in addition to

any relief it could grant in a court proceeding.

[12]   It is unnecessary for the purpose of this appeal to decide whether other

factors would have taken the claim outside the jurisdiction of the Board had the

damages claimed been less than the monetary limit for the Small Claims Court –

including (i) the fact that the action asserted claims under the Occupiers’ Liability
                                                Page: 5


Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. O.2 and (ii) the status of the appellant as the estate of a

deceased tenant. See, for example, the discussion in Mackie at paras. 43-44, as

to the effect of claims under other legislation on the “essential character” of the

claim, which in each case is determined based on the factual context.

(2)      The Limitation Period for Applications to the Board Does Not Apply

[13]     The motion judge concluded that, although the estate’s claim exceeded

the monetary jurisdiction of the Board, the action had to be commenced within

the one-year limitation period for applications to the Board under the Act (s.

29(2)) before the court could assume jurisdiction.

[14]     In arriving at this conclusion, the motion judge followed Efrach v.

Cherishome Living, 2015 ONSC 472, [2015] O.J. No. 293 (Div. Ct.), a decision of

a single judge of the Divisional Court upholding an appeal from the Small Claims

Court. The appeal judge in Efrach agreed with the Deputy Judge’s

characterization of the claim as one of non-repair2 and held that the Board had

exclusive jurisdiction. In the part of her decision that is relevant here, she refused

leave to amend the claim to permit damages exceeding the monetary jurisdiction

of the Board, and to transfer the action to the Superior Court. She reasoned that,

after the expiry of the one year limitation period for making a claim to the Board,



2
  The claim was for damages resulting from a break-in of the appellant’s rental unit, allegedly by entry
through an unoccupied and unlocked neighbouring unit.
                                       Page: 6


the claim could not be transferred to the Superior Court since that court “can only

exercise powers that the Board could have exercised if the proceeding had been

before the Board”: at para. 21.

[15]    While we express no opinion on the result in Efrach, we disagree with the

conclusion that the one year limitation period for applications to the Board applies

to actions before the Superior Court for non-repair. The motion judge here erred

in following the reasoning in Efrach and concluding that the court lacked

jurisdiction over the action.

[16]    There is simply no basis for importing the limitation period prescribed by

the Act for applications to the Board into an action of this kind. The limitation of

actions is governed by the Limitations Act, 2002, S.O. 2002, c. 24, Sch. B. and,

pursuant to s. 19, the limitation periods listed in the schedule to that Act

(including s. 38(3) of the Trustee Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. T.23 which requires a tort

action by an estate to be commenced within two years of the deceased’s death).

As the action was commenced within two years of the deceased’s death (and

indeed within two years of the alleged slip and fall), there is no question of the

expiry of any limitation period to bar the action.

[17]    Accordingly, the Superior Court has jurisdiction over the action and the

claims are not statute-barred.
                                   Page: 7


CONCLUSION

[18]   The appeal is allowed. Costs of the appeal to the appellant fixed at

$10,000, inclusive of HST, plus disbursements in the amount of $3,987.76. Given

the result, the appellant is awarded its costs of the motion below in the all-

inclusive amount of $7,500.

Released: “HSL” JUN 1 2017

                                                           “H.S. LaForme J.A.”
                                                        “K. van Rensburg J.A.”
                                                          “Grant Huscroft J.A.”
