                   COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

                                   CITATION: Cirillo v. Ontario, 2021 ONCA 353
                                                                DATE: 20210526
                                                              DOCKET: C68470

                      Rouleau, Benotto and Thorburn JJ.A.

BETWEEN

                                  Robin Cirillo

                                                               Plaintiff (Appellant)

                                      and

                   Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Ontario

                                                        Defendant (Respondent)


Kirk M. Baert, Celeste Poltak, Charles Hatt, Scott C. Hutchison and Lauren Mills
Taylor, for the appellant

Christopher A. Wayland, Jeffrey Claydon and S. Zachary Green, for the
respondent

Heard: February 1 and 2, 2021 by video conference

On appeal from the orders of Justice Edward M. Morgan of the Superior Court of
Justice, dated May 23, 2019 and June 26, 2020, with reasons reported at 2019
ONSC 3066 and 2020 ONSC 3983.

Benotto J.A.:

[1]   The appellant, Robin Cirillo, sought to certify a class proceeding claiming

redress for the Crown’s failure to hold timely bail hearings for accused persons.

She based her claims as a representative plaintiff on negligence, breach of
                                      Page: 2


fiduciary duty and rights under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The motion

judge dismissed the motion for certification. She appeals the order to this Court.

She also appeals a second order dealing with the application of the Crown Liability

and Proceedings Act, 2019, S.O. 2019, c. 7, Sched. 17 (“CLPA”).

[2]    I would dismiss the appeal. The proposed class action does not meet the

requirements of the Class Proceedings Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 6 (“CPA”). There

is no cause of action in negligence, as the claim attacks core policy decisions

insulated from tort liability. The appellant did not raise the fiduciary duty issue in

written or oral argument. The Charter claims arise from a purported right to a bail

hearing within 24 hours of arrest. Whether or not this right exists, the proposed

class definition is flawed, there are no common issues, and a class action is not

the preferable procedure. It is unnecessary to determine whether certification of

the negligence claims would also be barred by s.11 of the CLPA.

I.    FACTS

       (1) Background

[3]    The appellant was arrested on the evening of May 28, 2017 following an

altercation with her ex-spouse during which she allegedly brandished a butter

knife. No one was injured.

[4]    The appellant was detained in a holding cell at the police station until the

next morning when she was taken to the courthouse. She says she arrived at
                                     Page: 3


approximately 12:30 p.m. She was expecting to be released on consent. At 2:47

p.m., when the matter was placed on the court docket, duty counsel advised the

court that the appellant’s matter could not proceed because sureties were being

interviewed. The justice of the peace then began a contested bail hearing in

another matter.

[5]   The contested bail hearing was interrupted at 3:25 p.m. by two offers from

other courts to traverse matters. There was no indication that duty counsel was

ready to proceed with the appellant’s hearing. Nor was there a request to have her

matter traversed.

[6]   The justice of the peace called the matter at around 5:24 p.m. Duty counsel

advised the court that this was to be a consent release. She argued that the court

was without jurisdiction to adjourn the matter, since neither counsel requested an

adjournment, and that a lack of judicial resources should not be a reason for an

adjournment. Duty counsel conceded that this was the earliest the matter could

proceed. The justice of the peace rejected duty counsel’s submissions and

adjourned court for the day, noting that there had been ample time for the hearing

and that the court was simply out of time for the day.

[7]   The appellant was transported to detention and returned to the court the

next day. She was released on consent with multiple conditions and surety bail.
                                       Page: 4


      (2) The proposed class action

[8]     The appellant commenced this action on behalf of herself and the following

persons:

              [A]ll … persons who were arrested and detained for a
              period of more than 24 hours prior to any Bail Hearing
              being available as a result of:

              (a) the matter not being reached;

              (b) transportation, or lack thereof, from detention to bail
              hearing;

              (c) interpretive services not present at the bail hearing;

              (d) the accused not having the opportunity to speak with
              counsel prior to arriving at the bail hearing; or

              (f) the Crown not being willing to proceed with a hearing;

              for the time period of January 1, 2000 to the present, but
              excluding individuals charged with an offence mentioned
              in s. 469 of the Criminal Code.

[9]     The appellant challenges what she describes as the Crown’s operational

failure in carrying out its constitutional and statutory duty to ensure a bail hearing

within 24 hours, as required by the Criminal Code and the Charter. She says that

the respondent has mismanaged the bail system, failed to provide the system with

adequate resources, and has promulgated policies for Crown prosecutors that

have had the effect of increasing the number of people in remand. She claims that

the Crown’s actions constitute systemic negligence against the putative class
                                       Page: 5


members. In addition, she argues that the actions of the respondent violated the

putative class members’ ss. 7, 9, 11(d), 11(e), and 12 Charter rights.

[10]     The appellant seeks declaratory relief, including declaratory relief for

negligence and breach of Charter rights. For instance, she seeks a declaration that

the respondent is liable “for the damages caused by its breach of its common law

duty in relation to the operation, management, administration, supervision, funding

and control of bail hearings in Ontario”. She also seeks general and punitive

damages.

   (3) Decisions below

   (a)      Certification

[11]     The motion judge found that certification should be denied because: (i) the

pleadings did not disclose a cause of action in negligence as the claims are not

justiciable; (ii) it is plain and obvious that the claims based on breach of fiduciary

duty have no prospect of success; (iii) the appellant’s claims for breach of Charter

rights were not common to class members; and (iv) a class proceeding was not

the preferable procedure for resolution of the class members’ claims.

[12]     With respect to the appellant’s claims of negligence and breach of fiduciary

duty, the motion judge first concluded that there could be no cause of action

against the Crown in its prosecutorial capacity, as the immunity of the Crown as

prosecutor (except for malicious prosecution) is “deeply entrenched” in law. As the
                                      Page: 6


claims could not be aimed at the Crown’s actual handling of bail proceedings, the

causes of action must be aimed at broader decisions related to staffing and

resource allocation decisions. Such claims require the court to go outside of its

institutional competence.

[13]   Relying on Phaneuf v. Ontario, 2010 ONCA 901, 104 O.R. (3d) 392, the

motion judge concluded that underfunding alone cannot create a civil cause of

action. He also noted that the impugned government actions were “core policy

decisions”, as defined in R. v. Imperial Tobacco Canada Ltd., 2011 SCC 42, [2011]

3 S.C.R. 45. As a result, the respondent is immune from liability in negligence and

the negligence claim is doomed to fail.

[14]   The motion judge held that the fiduciary claims were also doomed to fail.

The issues raised by the appellant “provide[d] no basis for fiduciary duties as they

do not require that any one vulnerable individual be favoured over another”.

[15]   Finally, the motion judge concluded that the only possible cause of action

pleaded was for breach of Charter rights. However, he concluded that there were

no common issues to be certified. The class needed to share not simply a common

court infrastructure but a common experience of having a specific Charter right

violated. In this case, that would be difficult to demonstrate given that the Charter

breaches alleged (ss. 7, 9, 11(d), 11(e), and 12) all “share a common thread of
                                         Page: 7


reasonableness” and that reasonableness is “a difficult standard” to assess as a

common issue because the analysis is so fact dependent.

[16]     The motion judge outlined the potential for multiple causes of the delay in

the appellant’s bail hearing. The delay could be attributed to the Toronto Police

Service (for the delay in transportation), the judge (for adjourning the matter), and

duty counsel (who needed more time to prepare the appellant’s sureties). As a

result, the motion judge found that the Charter claims required an individualized

assessment of each case and therefore could not be certified as a common issue.

[17]     Having found that there were no common issues, the motion judge found

that the proposed class action was not the preferable procedure. He also found

that it is “in doubt” whether there is an identifiable class and questioned whether

the plaintiff was a suitable representative plaintiff.

   (b)      Divisional Court Appeal & the CLPA

[18]     Ms. Cirillo appealed the motion judge’s certification decision to the Divisional

Court. The week after she served her notice of appeal, the CLPA came into force.

The Crown relied on ss. 11(4) and (5) of the CLPA in its responding factum on

appeal to argue that certification of the negligence claims was now statute barred.

Section 11(4) provides:

               (4) No cause of action arises against the Crown or an
               officer, employee or agent of the Crown in respect of any
               negligence or failure to take reasonable care in the
               making of a decision in good faith respecting a policy
                                     Page: 8


            matter, or any negligence in a purported failure to make
            a decision respecting a policy matter.

Section 11(5) defines the term “policy matter”:

            (5) For the purposes of subsection (4), a policy matter includes,

                   (a) the creation, design, establishment, redesign or modification
                   of a program, project or other initiative, including,

                           (i) the terms, scope or features of the program, project
                           or other initiative,

                           (ii) the eligibility or exclusion of any person or entity or
                           class of persons or entities to participate in the program,
                           project or other initiative, or the requirements or limits
                           of such participation, or

                           (iii) limits on the duration of the program, project or
                           other initiative, including any discretionary right to
                           terminate or amend the operation of the program,
                           project or other initiative;

                   (b) the funding of a program, project or other initiative,
                   including,

                            (i) providing or ceasing to provide such funding,

                            (ii) increasing or reducing the amount of funding
                            provided,

                            (iii) including, not including, amending or removing
                            any terms or conditions in relation to such funding, or

                            (iv) reducing or cancelling any funding previously
                            provided or committed in support of the program,
                            project or other initiative;

                   (c) the manner in which a program, project or other initiative is
                   carried out, including,

                           (i) the carrying out, on behalf of the Crown, of some or
                           all of a program, project or other initiative by another
                                       Page: 9


                            person or entity, including a Crown agency, Crown
                            corporation, transfer payment recipient or independent
                            contractor,

                            (ii) the terms and conditions under which the person or
                            entity will carry out such activities,

                            (iii) the Crown’s degree of supervision or control over
                            the person or entity in relation to such activities, or

                            (iv) the existence or content of any policies,
                            management procedures or oversight mechanisms
                            concerning the program, project or other initiative;

             (d) the termination of a program, project or other initiative, including
             the amount of notice or other relief to be provided to affected members
             of the public as a result of the termination;

             (e) the making of such regulatory decisions as may be prescribed;
             and

             (f) any other policy matter that may be prescribed.

[19]   The Crown also relied on s. 31(4) of the CLPA, which provides for the

retroactive extinguishment of claims under s. 11. This would have caused the claim

to have failed at the first requirement for certification in s. 5(1)(a) of the CPA.

[20]   The Divisional Court remitted the question of whether the CLPA was a bar

to certification of the negligence claims to the motion judge so that all the issues

could eventually be considered together by the same panel on appeal.
                                     Page: 10


   (c)     Re-hearing on Crown Immunity

[21]     Relying on his original findings of fact, the motion judge held that the

impugned decisions were “core policy decisions” and, as a result, ss. 11(4) and (5)

of the CLPA applied to the appellant’s certification motion.

[22]     During the hearing, both parties agreed that ss. 11(4) and (5) do not

represent a substantial change in the common law on Crown immunity. However,

the respondent submitted that the new sections “codify and more clearly define”

the types of decisions for which the Crown is immune.

[23]     The motion judge chose not to opine on whether the CLPA broadened the

scope of Crown immunity from the common law and whether ss. 11(4) and (5) of

the CLPA violate s. 96 of the Constitution Act, 1867, because it was unnecessary

to do so. He already concluded that the impugned decisions were policy decisions

under the common law before the enactment of the CLPA, and nothing in the CLPA

affected this conclusion.

[24]     The appellant appealed the CLPA decision to this court. Nordheimer J.A.

granted the request to consolidate the appellant’s Divisional Court certification

appeal and her CLPA appeal so that this court could hear both appeals together.
                                       Page: 11


II.    POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

The appellant

[25]     The appellant alleges that the motion judge made five key errors in his

reasons:

      • The motion judge erred in holding that the statement of claim did not disclose

         a claim for negligence. In reaching that conclusion, he made several errors,

         including that he mischaracterized the claims as attacking core policy

         decisions and failed to consider whether the causes of action arose from

         Crown decisions made in bad faith.

      • The motion judge erred by finding that the CLPA immunized the respondent

         from liability without considering whether the immunity was vitiated by s. 17

         of the CLPA, which deals with claims of bad faith.

      • The motion judge erred in holding that there was no common issue for the

         Charter claim.

      • The motion judge made a palpable and overriding error in finding that a class

         proceeding would not be the preferable procedure for resolution of the

         claims.

[26]     The appellant also argued that the motion judge made merits determinations

regarding the tenability of the appellant’s personal claim. I address this at the

conclusion of my reasons.
                                      Page: 12


[27]   The appellant’s amended notice of appeal purports to appeal the motion

judge’s holding on fiduciary duty, but since she made no written or oral

submissions on this issue, I understand that she has effectively abandoned it.

The respondent

[28]   The respondent submits that, even though the bar for certification is low, the

motion judge was correct to dismiss the certification motion. The Crown submits

that there is no tenable cause of action. The negligence claims attack core policy

decisions. The premise on which the appellant’s Charter and negligence claims

are based – that there is a “right to” a bail “hearing” within 24 hours – is flawed.

Furthermore, there is no identifiable class. Nor are there any common issues, and

for that reason, a class action is not the preferable procedure.

III. ISSUES

[29]   The main issue for this court is whether the criteria in s. 5(1) of the CPA have

been satisfied.

IV. ANALYSIS

[30]   To be certified as a class proceeding, the claim must comply with s. 5(1) of

the CPA. Under s. 5(1) of the CPA, in order to be certified as a class action the

plaintiff must demonstrate that:

             (a) the pleadings or the notice of application disclose a
             cause of action;
                                      Page: 13


             (b) there is an identifiable class of two or more persons
             that would be represented by the representative plaintiff
             or defendant;

             (c) the claims or defences of the class members raise
             common issues;

             (d) a class proceeding would be the preferable procedure
             for the resolution of the common issues; and

             (e) there is a representative plaintiff or defendant who,

             (i) would fairly and adequately represent the interests of
             the class,

             (ii) has produced a plan for the proceeding that sets out
             a workable method of advancing the proceeding on
             behalf of the class and of notifying class members of the
             proceeding, and

             (iii) does not have, on the common issues for the class,
             an interest in conflict with the interests of other class
             members.

[31]   In this case, there is a dispute about the criteria under (a) through (d). I will

deal with each of those criteria.

       (a)   Section 5(1)(a): Cause of action

[32]   Section 5(1)(a) of the CPA requires that the pleadings disclose a cause of

action. The certification requirement under s. 5(1)(a) is the same as r. 21.01 of the

Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194. The pleadings cannot form the

basis of a claim if it is “plain and obvious” that they do not disclose a cause of

action. The causes of action are in negligence and breach of Charter rights.
                                      Page: 14


       (i) Negligence

[33]   The appellant’s pleading alleges that the Crown owes a duty of care to

criminal accused and must “manage bail court volumes to avoid known

overcrowding of dockets or provide sufficient resources to address high volume of

dockets”, “provide timely transportation from detention to Bail Hearings”, “establish

Bail Hearings proximate to the location of Class members’ arrest and detention”,

“pre-arrange necessary interpretation services for Class members”, and “provide

Class members with contact to counsel prior to arrival at a Bail Hearing”.

[34]   The appellant alleges that the respondent has failed to meet the standard of

care, because it has failed to provide adequate resources to bail hearings, which

“guarantees the volume of bail hearings cannot be heard in a timely manner”. It

has also failed to provide: (1) adequate transportation to transport putative class

members to bail hearings; (2) adequate interpretation services; and (3) counsel

access to putative class members prior to their arrival at bail court. In addition, the

appellant alleges that the respondent has breached its standard of care by over-

relying on sureties and requiring their attendance at bail hearings.

[35]   The motion judge determined these claims were core policy decisions and

thus could not ground a negligence claim.
                                     Page: 15


[36]   The appellant submits that the motion judge erred in concluding that these

claims relate to core policy decisions. Rather, she says the allegations relate to

operational decisions, not policy choices.

[37]   I do not agree. The claims on their face relate to core policy decisions.

Contrary to the appellant’s submission, further evidence on this issue is

unnecessary.

[38]   The Supreme Court has described the type of policy decisions that cannot

ground an action in tort in Imperial Tobacco, at para. 87:

             Instead of defining protected policy decisions negatively,
             as “not operational”, [they are defined] positively as
             discretionary legislative or administrative decisions and
             conduct that are grounded in social, economic, and
             political considerations. Generally, policy decisions are
             made by legislators or officers whose official
             responsibility requires them to assess and balance public
             policy considerations. The decision is a considered
             decision that represents a “policy” in the sense of a
             general rule or approach, applied to a particular situation.
             It represents “a course or principle of action adopted or
             proposed by a government”: New Oxford Dictionary of
             English (1998), at p. 1434. When judges are faced with
             such a course or principle of action adopted by a
             government, they generally will find the matter to be a
             policy decision. The weighing of social, economic, and
             political considerations to arrive at a course or principle
             of action is the proper role of government, not the courts.
             For this reason, decisions and conduct based on these
             considerations cannot ground an action in tort.
             [Emphasis added.]
                                     Page: 16


[39]   In Imperial Tobacco, the court moved away from the stark dichotomy

between policy/operational decisions in favour of a more principled test. Referring

back to Imperial Tobacco, the court in Hinse v. Canada, 2015 SCC 35, [2015] 2

S.C.R. 621, at para. 23, confirmed the nature of core policy decisions that are

protected from suit:

             … [I]t is not helpful to posit a stark dichotomy between
             policy decisions and operational decisions, or to define
             policy decisions negatively as decisions that are not
             “operational” decisions: paras. 84-86. Although it
             refrained from establishing a black-and-white test, the
             Court concluded that core policy government decisions
             that are protected from suit are “decisions as to a course
             or principle of action that are based on public policy
             considerations, such as economic, social and political
             factors, provided they are neither irrational nor taken in
             bad faith”.

[40]   The negligence claims against the respondent in this proposed class action

are clearly aimed at core policy decisions. They relate to resource allocation for

bail hearings and staffing. The supporting material filed on the motion refers to the

adequacy of “physical court space” and the need to build (instead of to renovate)

courthouses. The claims focus on the role of government wielding its executive

authority to determine the allocation and adequacy of resources devoted to the

criminal justice system.

[41]   The motion judge described the nature and breadth of the negligence

claims, concluding the appellant challenged core policy decisions:
                                     Page: 17


             For a litigant to seek redress for the government's
             resource decisions on a province-wide basis, to bring an
             action that requires a court to delve into the propriety and
             efficiency of those decisions, is to go outside the court's
             institutional competence….

             The sheer magnitude of this class action, its design in
             alleging liability for policy decisions at a high level, its
             direct impugning of the Province’s budgetary process,
             makes it legally untenable. It raises causes of action that
             do not exist and encounters Crown immunities that apply
             to these kinds of wide-ranging policy decisions. They are
             in the nature of “core policy decisions” – i.e. “decisions
             as to a course or principle of action that are based on
             public policy considerations, such as economic, social
             and political factors, provided they are neither irrational
             nor taken in bad faith” – and are protected from suit.
             [Citations omitted.]

[42]   The appellant alleges that the motion judge erred by inserting an analysis of

resource allocation and underfunding into the proximity stage of the Anns analysis

instead of considering them at the second residual policy stage of the Anns test.

In my view, this makes no practical difference in this case. At whatever stage policy

immunity is considered, the result is the same. The motion judge did not err when

he concluded that the claim implicated core policy decisions and as such, there

could be no claim in negligence.

[43]   The appellant has submitted that the motion judge failed to consider that the

operational failures were taken in bad faith. This is not correct. The motion judge

correctly found that bad faith was not alleged in the pleadings and no particulars
                                      Page: 18


were pleaded. Further, the appellant’s witnesses acknowledged that there was no

allegation of bad faith.

[44]   I agree with the motion judge that it is plain and obvious that the claims in

negligence do not disclose a cause of action.

[45]   I add that, in any event, the negligence claims would not satisfy the

remaining criteria in ss. 5(1)(b) and (d) largely for the same reasons set out below

in relation to the Charter claims.

       (ii) Charter claims

[46]   The motion judge accepted that the Charter claims could satisfy the cause

of action criterion:

              The only possible causes of action pleaded that can
              survive the obstacles identified above are the claims for
              breach of Charter rights….

              Needless to say, there are no Crown immunities for
              breach of the Charter. It is undeniable that an
              "[u]nreasonably prolonged custody awaiting a bail
              hearing gives rise to a breach of s. 11(e) of the
              Charter"…. It is equally the case that such unreasonable
              denial of bail impugns the presumption of innocence in s.
              11(d) of the Charter….

              Furthermore, the Charter claims are framed in a way that
              does not raise a justiciability problem in the same way as
              the negligence and fiduciary duty claims do. They are
              more specifically aimed at the role of the Crown in the
              bail process itself and not at the "government in its
              generic sense — meaning he whole of the apparatus of
              state", which would beyond the scope of a valid Charter
              claim….
                                      Page: 19


[47]   The motion judge nonetheless refused to certify the Charter claims. He did

so because the Charter claims raised no common issues and so a class

proceeding is not the preferable procedure. He also doubted that there is an

identifiable class.

[48]   I agree with the motion judge that the Charter claims should not be certified.

[49]   I do not need to address the viability of the cause of action with respect to

the Charter claims. Even if the Charter claims were to satisfy s. 5(1)(a), they do

not meet the identifiable class, common issue or preferability criteria. I turn to those

now.

       (b)    Section 5(1)(b): Identifiable class

[50]   A class definition must be defined by reference to objective criteria, without

reference to the merits of the action: Hollick v. Toronto, 2001 SCC 68, [2001] 3

S.C.R. 158, at para. 17.

[51]   As noted above, the appellant’s putative class includes all persons within

the class period who did not get a bail hearing within 24 hours “as a result of”

certain criteria:

              The Plaintiff brings this action pursuant to the CPA on her
              own behalf and on behalf of all other persons who were
              arrested and detained for a period of more than 24 hours
              prior to any meaningful Bail Hearing being available as a
              result of:

              (a) the matter not being reached;
                                     Page: 20


             (b) transportation, or lack thereof, from detention to the
             bail hearing;

             (c) interpretative services not present at the bail hearing;

             (d) the accused not having the opportunity to speak with
             counsel prior to arriving at the bail hearing; or

             (e) the Crown not being willing to proceed with a hearing.

             for the time period of January 1, 2000 to the present, but
             excluding individuals charged with an offence mentioned
             in s.469 of the Criminal Code (the "Class").

[52]   In addition to appearing in the statement of claim, the “as a result of”

qualification appears throughout the proceedings: in the motion record, in

argument before the motion judge, in the proposed common issues and the

factum, and in argument before this court.

[53]   A causation criterion is inherently merit-based. In Ragoonanan Estate v.

Imperial Tobacco (2005), 78 O.R. (3d) 98 (S.C.), aff’d (2008) 236 O.A.C. 199 (Div.

Ct.), the court did not certify a class proceeding because there was a causation

element in the class identification. The proposed action was on behalf of persons

who claimed that a certain brand of cigarette ignited furniture or a mattress. The

motion judge held, at para. 37:

             [The proposed class definition] is merits-based because
             its application depends on proof of damage caused by
             fire and also on the resolution of a number of other issues
             of causation which may be seriously in dispute. These
             would include the question whether the fire started on
             upholstered furniture, or a mattress; whether the ignition
             source of the fire was a cigarette; and, if so, whether it
                                       Page: 21


             was manufactured by the defendant…. For these
             reasons, I find that the membership of such a class would
             not be sufficiently "identifiable" within the meaning of s.
             5(1)(b).

[54]   Here, the difficulty is that a factual determination is required as to the cause

of the delay beyond 24 hours. In an attempt to circumvent this problem, the

appellant submitted that the right to a hearing is actually “within a reasonable time”.

This qualification is also problematic for it results in a class definition that would be

based on individual assessments and would be incapable of objective

determination.

[55]   I conclude that the identifiable class criterion is not met.

       (c)   Section 5(1)(c): Common issues

[56]   Common issue 5 relates to the Charter claims:

             By its operation, management or administration of bail
             hearings in Ontario, did the Defendant breach the class
             members' Charter rights under ss. 7, 9, 11(d), 11(e)
             and/or 12?

             i) If the answer to common issue (5) is "yes", can the
             breach be saved by s. 1 of the Charter?

             ii) If the answer to common issue (5) is "yes", and the
             answer to common issue (5)(i) is "no", are the class
             members entitled to damages pursuant to s. 24(1) of the
             Charter?

[57]   The appellant submits that the question to be asked is whether there is

“some basis in fact” supporting a conclusion that the proposed common issues are
                                     Page: 22


common to all class members in the sense that their resolution will avoid

duplication of fact-finding or legal analysis: Pro-Sys Consultants Ltd. v. Microsoft

Corp., 2013 SCC 57, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 477, at para. 102; Western Canadian

Shopping Centres Inc. v. Dutton, 2001 SCC 46, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 534, at para. 39.

[58]   Here, the motion judge quoted the following passage from a leading text on

class actions in describing the cause of action requirement:

             The [common issue] requirement is set out succinctly in
             Warren Winkler, Paul Perell, Jasminka Kalajdzic, and
             Alison Warner, The Law of Class Actions in Canada
             (Toronto: Canada Law Book, 2014), 112-13:

                   [I]f an issue can be resolved only by asking
                   it of each class member, it is not a common
                   issue… An issue is not ‘common’ simply
                   because the same question arises in
                   connection with the claim of each class
                   member, if that issue can only be resolved
                   by inquiry into the circumstances of each
                   individual’s claim... The fact of a common
                   cause of action asserted by all class
                   members does not in itself give rise to a
                   common        issue    since     the    actual
                   determination of liability for each class
                   member       may     require    individualized
                   assessments.

[59]   The motion judge noted that “[a]t the very least, the claim must share not

only a common court infrastructure but a common experience of having a specific

Charter right violated.” He noted that all of the Charter issues that were said to be

engaged     “share[d]   a   common     thread    of   reasonableness”     and    that

“[r]easonableness is a difficult issue to assess as a common issue.” He concluded
                                    Page: 23


that “[t]he proposed common issues pertaining to the Charter claims require

individualized and particularized assessments of each case.” I agree with that

conclusion.

[60]   Here, the appellant asks whether “[b]y its operation, management or

administration of bail hearings in Ontario… the Defendant breach[ed] the class

members' Charter rights under ss. 7, 9, 11(d), 11(e) and/or 12”.

[61]   The appellant submits that all class members share an interest in whether

the Crown’s conduct offended the Charter, even if there is a significant level of

difference among the class members, even if the common questions require

nuanced answers based on the varied circumstances of class members, and even

when there may be individual issues remaining following the trial of common

issues. She submits that the reasonableness inquiry does not preclude a common

determination. She also submits, pointing to several cases, that courts have

repeatedly certified claims based on alleged Charter breaches.

[62]   For instance, in Johnson v. Ontario, 2016 ONSC 5314, 364 C.R.R. (2d) 17,

the plaintiffs were former inmates of the Elgin-Middlesex Detention Centre. They

contended that overcrowding coupled with a lack of supervision resulted in

inhumane conditions. Their statement of claim included a number of causes of

action, including breach of ss. 7 and 12 of the Charter. The motion judge found

that the questions relating to the alleged breaches of ss. 7 and 12 raised common
                                    Page: 24


issues. The focus was on the general operational methods adopted by the

Detention Centre.

[63]   In Lauzon v. Canada (Attorney General), 2014 ONSC 2811, 58 C.P.C. (7th)

201, aff’d 2015 ONSC 2620, 384 D.L.R. (4th) 532 (Div. Ct.), the plaintiff sought to

certify a class action on behalf of a class of inmates who wore t-shirts that were

designed to commemorate Prisoner Justice Day. The Crown subsequently

prohibited possession of the t-shirts. The plaintiffs claimed the Crown’s conduct

breached their right to freedom of expression under s. 2(b) of the Charter. The

motion judge concluded that the proposed common issues on breach of the

Charter satisfied the common issues requirement. The activity in question was the

same (wearing the t-shirts at Joyceville), the prohibition was imposed on all

inmates, and if there was a breach, the s. 1 analysis would be common to all

inmates.

[64]   Finally, the appellant relies on Good v. Toronto Police Services Board, 2014

ONSC 4583, 121 O.R. (3d) 413 (Div. Ct.), aff'd 2016 ONCA 250, 130 O.R. (3d)

241, leave to appeal refused, [2016] S.C.C.A. No. 255. There, the plaintiff alleged

a breach of the class members’ rights not to be arbitrarily detained during the G20

summit in Toronto. There was some basis in fact of commonality: it was alleged a

common order was made ordering the detention of the class members without

regard for the individual characteristics or conduct of each class member.
                                     Page: 25


[65]   In my view, these cases share a distinguishing feature. The Charter

questions arise from a single course of conduct: Johnson considered the common

conditions inmates experienced in the same jail; Lauzon involved the decision to

prohibit the t-shirts; Good involved an alleged command order to “box in” certain

groups during a protest. Here, there is no single course of conduct giving rise to

the alleged breaches.

[66]   I consider the British Columbia Court of Appeal’s analysis in Thorburn v.

British Columbia, 2013 BCCA 480, 52 B.C.L.R. (5th) 130, to be applicable. In that

case, the representative plaintiff had been arrested at a protest and strip-searched

in accordance with a specific policy. The plaintiff brought a class proceeding on

behalf of those persons who were not remanded into pre-trial custody at the jail

but who were subjected to routine strip searches. The motion judge dismissed the

certification motion, and the Court of Appeal upheld the decision. At paras. 41-42,

the court stated:

             An unreasonable policy alone could not provide the
             foundation for determining each class member’s cause
             of action of an unreasonable search; only an individual
             assessment of the relevant circumstances unique to
             each class member would allow a judge to determine if a
             cause of action had been established.

                                        …

             [A] finding of a s. 8 Charter violation as a result of an
             unreasonable search of one class member will not found
             a similar finding for another class member as a finding of
                                    Page: 26


             an unreasonable search is dependent on a multitude of
             variable circumstances unique to each class member.

[67]   Here, the Charter claims are similarly not capable of common determination.

For example:

             Sections 7 and 9: Any detention would have resulted from
             adjournment and remand orders, which are not being challenged. If
             they were challenged, the case would depend on the reasons why
             each was made.

             Section 11(e): Whether bail was “reasonable”, including whether the
             terms of release were reasonable, are individual questions.

             Section 12: The pleading does not contain factual allegations that
             would support this claim. Detention pursuant to a court order, without
             more, does not constitute cruel and unusual punishment. To the
             extent that any putative class member has a claim for cruel and
             unusual punishment, the facts that would support it would be
             necessarily individual: see Ogiamien v. Ontario (Ministry of
             Community Safety and Correctional Services), 2017 ONCA 667, 355
             C.C.C. (3d) 41, at paras. 67-68; Toure v. Canada (Minister of Public
             Safety and Emergency Preparedness), 2018 ONCA 681, 419 C.R.R.
             (2d) 114, at paras. 75-76.

[68]   Accordingly, I conclude that the common issue requirement is not met.

       (d)   Section 5(1)(d): preferable procedure

[69]   Despite the allegation of a systemic wrong, a class proceeding is not the

preferable procedure. This court in Dennis v. Ontario Lottery and Gaming Corp.,

2013 ONCA 501, 115 O.R. (3d) 321, at para. 71, leave to appeal refused, [2013]

S.C.C.A. No. 373, said:

             Even if the class definition and common issue
             requirements were satisfied, it is my view that a class
                                       Page: 27


              action is not the preferable procedure. A general finding
              of "systemic wrong" would not avoid the need for
              protracted individualized proceedings into the
              vulnerability and circumstances of each class member. A
              more efficient and expeditious way to adjudicate these
              claims would be to proceed directly by way of individual
              actions as it is inevitable that a class proceeding will
              break down into individual proceedings in any event.

[70]    Similarly, in light of the foregoing conclusions, a class proceeding is not the

preferable procedure. I agree with the motion judge’s reasons.

        (e)   Crown Liability and Proceedings Act

[71]    The Divisional Court remitted the matter to the motion judge for a decision

on the impact of the CLPA. He concluded that his decision was unaffected by the

enactment of the new statute.

[72]    After oral submissions in this court, the parties requested and were given

the opportunity to make brief further submissions with respect to the release of

Leroux v. Ontario, 2021 ONSC 2269 (Div. Ct.) and Francis v. Ontario, 2021 ONCA

197. Neither case impacts my conclusions on the substantive issues set out above.

Given my conclusions, I do not need to address the CLPA or Leroux and Francis.

V.     APPELLANT’S PERSONAL CLAIMS IN NEGLIGENCE

[73]    Although the appellant’s factum states that the motion judge struck her

personal claim in negligence, the order of May 23, 2019 only dismisses the

certification of the class proceeding. The order of June 26, 2020 determines that
                                    Page: 28


the CLPA is a bar to the certification of her negligence claims. An appeal is from

the order and not the reasons: Fram Elgin Mills 90 Inc. v. Romandale Farms Ltd.,

2016 ONCA 404, 131 O.R. (3d) 455, at para. 33. Consequently, I conclude that

the issue is not properly before us and make no determination with respect to her

personal claims.

VI. CONCLUSION

[74]   The proposed class action does not meet the certification requirements of

the CPA.

[75]   I would dismiss the appeal. If the parties do not agree on costs, I would

request written submissions limited to five pages within 15 days of the release of

this decision.

Released: May 26, 2021 “P.R.”
                                                               “M.L. Benotto J.A.”
                                                      “I agree Paul Rouleau J.A.”
                                                      “I agree J.A. Thorburn J.A.”
