                     COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

          CITATION: Strudwick v. Applied Consumer & Clinical Evaluations Inc.,
                                                             2016 ONCA 520
                                                            DATE: 20160630
                                                          DOCKET: C60903

                       Doherty, Epstein and Miller JJ.A.

BETWEEN

                            Vicky Karen Strudwick

                                                               Plaintiff (Appellant/
                                              Respondent by way of cross-appeal))

                                        and

                 Applied Consumer & Clinical Evaluations Inc.

                                                          Defendant (Respondent/
                                                 Appellant by way of cross-appeal)


Christopher Du Vernet and Carlin McGoogan, for the appellant

Ernest D. Coetzee, for the respondent

Heard: February 3, 2016

On appeal from the judgment of Justice Grant R. Dow of the Superior Court of
Justice, dated August 7, 2015.

Epstein J.A.:

[1] This wrongful dismissal action arose out of a long-term employment

relationship between the appellant, Vicky Strudwick, and the respondent, Applied

Consumer and Clinical Evaluations Inc., a business that recruits people to
                                       Page: 2


participate in focus groups. Ms. Strudwick worked for Applied Consumer for over

15 years, initially in data entry and later instructing recruiting staff. At the time of

her dismissal in May 2011, Ms. Strudwick was earning $12.85 per hour.

[2] In October 2010, Ms. Strudwick suddenly became completely deaf. While

the cause is uncertain, her doctors believe it was a virus. At that time, Raymond

Berta, the owner and manager of Applied Consumer, was away from his

business dealing with a medical problem. The general manager of Applied

Consumer, Andrew Hoffman, had taken over the operations of the company in

Mr. Berta’s absence. Almost immediately after Ms. Strudwick became deaf,

Mr. Hoffman, together with Ms. Strudwick’s immediate supervisor, Liz Camilleri,

commenced a campaign of abuse against Ms. Strudwick designed to force her

resignation. This abuse will be described in more detail later in these reasons. In

summary, in addition to publically belittling, harassing and isolating Ms. Strudwick

in ways relating to her disability, Applied Consumer not only denied

Ms. Strudwick any accommodation of her disability but also took specific steps to

increase the difficulties she faced as a result of her not being able to hear. The

culmination of this abuse came on May 27, 2011 when Mr. Hoffman fired

Ms. Strudwick for a “stunt [she] had [allegedly] pulled” at a company event.

[3] Ms. Strudwick sued Applied Consumer for damages for wrongful dismissal

and related claims arising out of the abuse. Applied Consumer did not defend the

action and was noted in default. After an unsuccessful attempt to have the noting
                                              Page: 3


in default set aside, a hearing took place to assess damages. The motion judge

considered Ms. Strudwick’s uncontradicted evidence and submissions of counsel

for both parties1 and granted judgment in favour of Ms. Strudwick in the

aggregate amount of $113,782.79, including pre-judgment interest, plus $40,000

in costs.

[4] Ms. Strudwick appeals the damages assessment on the basis that, given

Applied Consumer’s extraordinarily egregious conduct, the motion judge erred by

assessing damages that were simply too low. She also seeks leave to appeal the

motion judge’s costs award. Applied Consumer does not challenge the motion

judge’s damage awards. However, in its cross-appeal, it seeks leave to appeal

costs. If leave is granted, it asks this court to reduce the costs award to $20,000.

[5] I would allow the appeal and dismiss the cross-appeal. For the reasons that

follow, I have concluded that, in certain respects, the trial judge erred in his

award of damages. I would increase the total damages to $246,049.92. In terms

of the cross-appeal, I am of the view that there is no reason to disturb the trial

judge’s costs order. I would therefore not grant leave to appeal costs to either

party.




1
  Counsel for Ms. Strudwick consented to counsel for Applied Consumer’s making limited submissions on
the issue of appropriate pay in lieu of notice.
                                      Page: 4


Background in Brief

   (1) The Abuse

[6] There were two main aspects of abuse – Applied Consumer’s general

treatment of Ms. Strudwick and its conduct in relation to accommodating her

disability.

[7] With respect to the cruel treatment, the evidence demonstrated, and the

motion judge found, that Mr. Hoffman and Ms. Camilleri tormented Ms. Strudwick

for the specific purpose of making the work environment intolerable. For

example, Ms. Camilleri would purposely give Ms. Strudwick instructions in a

manner that prevented her from lip reading. Then, Ms. Camilleri would call

Ms. Strudwick “stupid” for not understanding the instructions. Ms. Camilleri would

chastise Ms. Strudwick for not answering the telephone. Mr. Hoffman demanded

that Ms. Strudwick produce a doctor’s opinion as to the precise cause of her

hearing loss. Since, as previously mentioned, the doctors were unable to identify

the cause of Ms. Strudwick’s hearing loss and so instead she provided

Mr. Hoffman with hearing test results. In response, Ms. Camilleri accused

Ms. Strudwick of being “too cheap” to produce a doctor’s note. Ms. Camilleri

suggested to Ms. Strudwick that she “just quit” and “go on disability”.

[8] The motion judge found that this conduct was intended to force

Ms. Strudwick to resign.
                                     Page: 5


[9] In terms of accommodation, the trial judge provided a description of

Mr. Hoffman’s abusive conduct toward Ms. Strudwick concerning the refusal of

even the most basic accommodation of her disability. Details of this refusal to

accommodate include denying Ms. Strudwick:

          the assistance of the Canadian Hearing Society in coming to the

            office and performing an accommodation assessment;

          access to important information in print;

          permission to bring an assistance dog to the workplace (it is of note

            that Mr. Berta had regularly brought his dog into the office);

          permission to use a special voice carry over telephone at her own

            expense;

          the benefit of a visual fire alarm that she also offered to pay for or

            her request to assign a person to notify her if the fire alarm was

            activated;

          her request to turn her desk around so that she could see people as

            they approached; and

          her request to use a vibrating or light-activated pager given to her by

            the Canadian Hearing Society.
                                      Page: 6


[10] Mr.   Hoffman    took   the   position   that   these   accommodations     were

“unnecessary”.

[11] Applied Consumer’s offensive response to its obligation to accommodate

Ms. Strudwick’s disability went further. As previously mentioned, in addition to

denying accommodation, Mr. Hoffman and Ms. Camilleri took specific steps

clearly designed to exacerbate the challenges Ms. Strudwick faced as a result of

her hearing loss. These steps included advising co-workers not to talk to her and

instructing other office workers to telephone Ms. Strudwick so she would miss the

call thereby providing Ms. Camilleri with yet another opportunity to ridicule her.

[12] In summary, in the lead-up to Ms. Strudwick’s termination, she was belittled,

isolated, humiliated and made to suffer the effects of her disability to the greatest

extent possible. This conduct was deliberate, malicious and designed to force

Ms. Strudwick to quit a job she had held for almost 16 years.

   (2) The Termination

[13] The employees of Applied Consumer had formed a Toastmasters Club. This

voluntary group met periodically at the workplace. The company encouraged

participation in the club. Ms. Strudwick was one of ten employees of Applied

Consumer who attended the Toastmasters’ meeting on May 26, 2011. She

helped select the topics to be addressed but did not give a presentation.
                                      Page: 7


[14] The next day Mr. Hoffman, in front of 13 other employees, confronted

Ms. Strudwick about the Toastmasters’ meeting. He berated her, calling her a

“goddamned fool”. Then, in the presence of Ms. Camilleri and another employee,

Mr. Hoffman terminated Ms. Strudwick’s employment for insubordination and

wilful misconduct, referring to a “stunt” at the Toastmasters’ event.

[15] Mr. Hoffman immediately provided Ms. Strudwick with a document

confirming her termination, a cheque for three months’ pay and a form of release.

When she did not sign the release, Mr. Hoffman took the cheque back. At that

point, Ms. Strudwick was escorted to her desk to collect her belongings and

marched out of the building in front of her co-workers.

   (3) The Consequences

[16] Ms. Strudwick did not receive her outstanding pay until Labour Community

Services of Peel Region intervened. Applied Consumer tendered a document to

Employment Services of Canada indicating Ms. Strudwick had been fired for

insubordination and wilful misconduct. This delayed Ms. Strudwick’s ability to

secure unemployment insurance payments.

[17] Ms. Strudwick’s efforts to mitigate her damages were largely unsuccessful.

In September 2014, she obtained part-time employment working sporadically for

$60 per day.
                                      Page: 8


[18] A psychiatrist diagnosed Ms. Strudwick as having an adjustment disorder

with mixed anxiety and depressed mood as a result of the manner in which

Applied Consumer treated her. To address these afflictions, Ms. Strudwick has

been forced to pay for extensive cognitive behavioural therapy.

   (4) The Legal Proceedings

[19] Ms. Strudwick commenced this action by statement of claim issued in

January 2012. In her pleading she claimed specific amounts under various

categories: damages for wrongful dismissal; restitution under s. 46.1 of the

Ontario Human Rights Code, R.S.O. 1990, c. H.19; general damages for breach

of good faith; punitive damages; and exemplary damages. The total amount

claimed was $240,000 plus an unquantified request for damages associated with

her loss of benefits during the notice period.

[20] Applied Consumer did not deliver a statement of defence and was noted in

default. The company moved to set aside the noting in default. In his March 10,

2014 reasons for dismissing the motion, Spence J. of the Superior Court of

Justice described Applied Consumer’s excuse for not defending as “clutching at

trivialities” and concluded that Applied Consumer’s conduct revealed a litigant

“who [had] no real interest in going to trial but simply [wished] to delay for as long

as possible”. This court dismissed Applied Consumer’s appeal from Spence J.’s

decision, saying that the motion judge’s characterization of the company’s
                                     Page: 9


conduct spoke volumes about its overall attitude toward the defence. Applied

Consumer sought leave to appeal this court’s decision to the Supreme Court.

Leave was denied.

[21] Prior to this appeal, as a result of the motion judge’s judgment of almost

$114,000 and the $40,000 cost award, in addition to the cost orders associated

with Applied Consumer’s failed efforts to cure its default in defending the action,

the company owed Ms. Strudwick close to $180,000, not including the costs

ultimately ordered by the Supreme Court.

[22] After the appeal and cross-appeal were launched, Ms. Strudwick, then on

social assistance, moved to lift the automatic stay of the enforcement of the

judgment. Applied Consumer, asserting financial difficulties, argued that it be

allowed to pay the amount it owed, in instalments.

[23] In his endorsement lifting the stay, Miller J.A. made the following

observations. There was no evidence in support of Applied Consumer’s assertion

of financial hardship. Applied Consumer had not “made a single voluntary

payment” to Ms. Strudwick and she had therefore been forced to execute on the

various cost orders in her favour. And, the motion to lift the stay was necessary

only because of the “unreasonable position” taken by Applied Consumer.
                                       Page: 10


THE APPEAL ON DAMAGES

ISSUES

[24] The primary issue in the appeal is whether the trial judge erred in his

assessment of damages within the various categories set out above. However, a

preliminary issue must be addressed and that is the fact that, on appeal,

Ms. Strudwick is seeking damages significantly in excess of the amount claimed

in her statement of claim. I will deal with this preliminary issue, first.

ANALYSIS

      (1)    Does the Statement of Claim limit the Award of Damages?

[25] On appeal, Ms. Strudwick seeks damages totalling $1,019,384.80. Applied

Consumer contends that the aggregate amount is limited by the amount claimed

in the statement of claim of $240,000 plus an amount to compensate

Ms. Strudwick for the loss of collateral benefits. In response to a question from

the panel, counsel for Applied Consumer acknowledged that his client would

suffer no prejudice if any award this court may order under a particular head of

damage exceeded the amount claimed under that head, provided the overall

damages awarded did not exceed the total amount claimed in the statement of

claim. Counsel left any such adjustment in the amount ordered under a particular

head of damage “in the court’s hands”.
                                               Page: 11


The Governing Principles

[26] In Burkhardt v. Beder, [1963] S.C.R. 86, at p. 91, the Supreme Court

referred to r. 147 of the Ontario Rules of Practice, which it characterized as

requiring “that when damages are claimed the amount shall be named in the

statement of claim”. The court then stated that “the authorities are clear that

judgment cannot be given for an amount greater than that claimed unless an

amendment is allowed”: p. 91.

[27] Rule 147 of The Rules of Practice and Procedure of the Supreme Court of

Ontario in Civil Matters, R.R.O., 1960, Reg. 396, stated “Every statement of claim

and counter-claim shall state specifically the relief claimed, either simply or in the

alternative, and may also ask for general relief, and, when damages are claimed,

the amount shall be named”.2 This is similar to the current r. 25.06(9) of the

Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, which states:

                (9) Where a pleading contains a claim for relief, the nature of the
                relief claimed shall be specified and, where damages are claimed,

                        (a) the amount claimed for each claimant in respect of each
                        claim shall be stated; and

                        (b) the amounts and particulars of special damages need only
                        be pleaded to the extent that they are known at the date of the
                        pleading, but notice of any further amounts and particulars
                        shall be delivered forthwith after they become known and, in
                        any event, not less than ten days before trial.



2
 The Supreme Court in Burkhardt paraphrases r. 147 and does not provide a direct citation beyond the
“Ontario Rules of Practice”; however, this appears to have been the wording at the time of the decision.
                                      Page: 12


[28] In my view, the similarity of the two rules supports the application of the rule

in Burkhardt in the context of the current rule and therefore in this case.

[29] This is also in keeping with the Supreme Court’s analysis in Whiten v. Pilot

Insurance, 2002 SCC 18, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 595. There, in considering whether or

not punitive damages needed to be specifically pleaded, Binnie J. stated, at

para. 87, “One of the purposes of a statement of claim is to alert the defendant to

the case it has to meet, and if at the end of the day the defendant is surprised by

an award against it that is a multiple of what it thought was the amount in issue,

there is an obvious unfairness.”

[30] This principle is reinforced by the number of cases in which parties awarded

damages in amounts greater than requested in their statement of claim have

sought to amend the pleadings following the award. For example, in B. (M.) v.

2014052 Ontario Ltd., 2012 ONCA 135, 109 O.R. (3d) 351, at paras. 71-74, the

jury awarded a general damages award of $300,000 to the respondent, who had

only claimed $250,000. On appeal, the appellant argued for a reduction of the

award to $250,000, in line with the statement of claim. At the respondent’s

request, the court granted leave to amend the pleadings under r. 26.01 to

conform with the jury’s general damages award.
                                     Page: 13


The Principles Applied

[31] I note Ms. Strudwick at no point prior to the hearing of this appeal sought to

amend her claim to increase the amount of damages requested. This issue was

addressed in oral argument by both counsel. Counsel for Applied Consumer

advised the court that during a previous hearing below, counsel for Ms. Strudwick

informed the court that he did not intend to seek to amend the statement of claim

to increase the damages as such a move would re-open pleadings, giving

Applied Consumer to defend the action. Counsel for Ms. Strudwick then indicated

to this court that he was moving to amend the pleadings. However, no motion

record was ever filed with this court, nor was any notice given to Applied

Consumer of any such motion. The matter went no further.

[32] In my view, in these circumstances, this court does not have jurisdiction to

award damages that exceed the amount claimed in the statement of claim;

namely, $240,000 plus the unquantified amount to compensate Ms. Strudwick for

the benefits she lost during the period of reasonable notice.

      (2)     Did the Motion Judge Err in his Award of Damages?

            (a) Standard of Review

[33] In Woelk v. Halvorson, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 430, at p. 435, the Supreme Court

held that an appellate court cannot interfere with a damages award simply

because it would have come to a different conclusion. Rather, as explained in
                                      Page: 14


Naylor Group Inc. v. Ellis-Don Construction Ltd., 2001 SCC 58, [2001] 2 S.C.R.

943, at para. 80, interference is only justified where the trial judge: (1) made an

error of principle or law; (2) misapprehended the evidence; (3) erred in finding

there to be evidence on which to base a conclusion; (4) failed to consider

relevant factors, or considered irrelevant factors; or (5) made “a palpably

incorrect” or “wholly erroneous” assessment of the damages.

[34] Ms. Strudwick challenges the damages awarded under each category for

different reasons. In the following analysis I will set out her position in respect of

each award. Applied Consumer’s position, however, is the same throughout and

so I will set it out here. In short, Applied Consumer submits that deference is

owed to the assessment of the trial judge, whose reasons display no error.

          (b) Damages for Wrongful Dismissal

[35] The motion judge found, at para. 21, that the circumstances placed

Ms. Strudwick at the “highest level for the number of months of notice”. He

concluded that the notice period should be 20 months. Based on the manner of

dismissal, the trial judge added four months for what has come to be known as

the “Wallace factor” (see Wallace v. United Grain Growers Ltd., [1997] 3 S.C.R.

701).
                                                  Page: 15


[36] The trial judge calculated damages for wrongful dismissal based on 24

months’ salary, using a two percent cost of living increase and a tax gross up, to

be $49,907.05.

[37] Ms. Strudwick submits that the trial judge erred by imposing an upper limit to

the length of the notice period. She argues that, given her age and disability, her

dismissal sentenced her to chronic unemployment. Ms. Strudwick submits that

applying the Bardal3 factors to her wrongful dismissal and taking into account the

manner of dismissal and the “scorched earth” litigation strategy, she should

receive pay in lieu of notice to age 65 – or for 125 months. With inflation and

gross up, this would amount to damages representing pay in lieu of notice of

$358,450.80.

The Governing Principles

[38] In Keays v. Honda Canada Inc., [2008] 2 S.C.R. 362, at para. 28, the

Supreme Court reinforced what have come to be known as the Bardal factors:

          In determining what constitutes reasonable notice of termination, the

          courts have generally applied the principles articulated by McRuer

          C.J.H.C. in Bardal, at p. 145:

                   There can be no catalogue laid down as to what is
                   reasonable notice in particular classes of cases. The
                   reasonableness of the notice must be decided with


3
    Bardal v. Globe & Mail Ltd. (1960), 24 D.L.R. (2d) 140 (Ont. H.C.J.).
                                     Page: 16


             reference to each particular case, having regard to the
             character of the employment, the length of service of
             the servant, the age of the servant and the availability of
             similar employment, having regard to the experience,
             training and qualification of the servant.

[39] In Keays, the court clarified that in determining the appropriate notice period

the court’s concern is the particular circumstances of the individual – no one

Bardal factor should be given disproportionate weight: Keays, at paras. 30, 32.

[40] This fact-specific and contextual approach to the period of reasonable

notice, limited by a range of reasonableness, is consistent with the manner in

which this court has reviewed wrongful dismissal awards. As Laskin J.A.

observed in Minott v. O’Shanter Development Co. (1999), 42 O.R. (3d) 321

(C.A.), at pp. 343-44:

             Determining the period of reasonable notice is an art not
             a science. In each case trial judges must weigh and
             balance a catalogue of relevant factors. No two cases
             are identical; and, ordinarily, there is no one "right"
             figure for reasonable notice. Instead, most cases yield a
             range of reasonableness. Therefore, a trial judge's
             determination of the period of reasonable notice is
             entitled to deference from an appellate court. An appeal
             court is not justified in interfering unless the figure
             arrived at by the trial judge is outside an acceptable
             range or unless, in arriving at the figure, the trial judge
             erred in principle or made an unreasonable finding of
             fact. If the trial judge erred in principle, an appellate
             court may substitute its own figure. But it should do so
             sparingly if the trial judge's award is within an
             acceptable range despite the error in principle.
                                    Page: 17


[41] This court has rejected the argument that there should be an upper limit on

notice periods in wrongful dismissal cases. In Di Tomaso v. Crown Metal

Packaging Canada LP, 2011 ONCA 469, 337 D.L.R. (4th) 679, at para. 23,

MacPherson J.A. declined to set a cap for the quantum of reasonable notice for

clerical and unskilled employees. This court has noted, however, that courts

should strive to ensure that notice periods are consistent with the case law:

Kotecha v. Affinia Canada ULC, 2014 ONCA 411, at para. 8.

[42] Although it is clear that reasonable notice of employment termination must

be determined on a case-specific basis and there is no absolute upper limit on

what constitutes reasonable notice, generally only exceptional circumstances will

support a base notice period in excess of 24 months: Lowndes v. Summit Ford

Sales Ltd. (2006), 206 O.A.C. 55 (C.A.), at para. 11; Keenan v. Canac Kitchens

Ltd., 2016 ONCA 79, at paras. 30-32.

The Principles Applied

[43] In my view, the motion judge did not err in his application of the governing

legal principles to the facts of this case. He correctly noted that the appropriate

range had no limit or cap. He was aware that Ms. Strudwick had worked for

Applied Consumer for 15 years and 8 months, and that she was 56 years old at

the time of termination. He observed that the distinction between greater notice

for highly skilled positions and less notice for clerical or unskilled work was

“largely irrelevant”. And he knew that the appellant had unsuccessfully sought
                                    Page: 18


full-time employment for four years. In determining a base notice period of 20

months, I see no error in principle. Nor do I view the amount ultimately awarded

as being outside an acceptable range.

[44] In addition, I do not agree with Ms. Strudwick’s argument that, in the

circumstances, Ms. Strudwick is entitled to pay and related benefits until she

turns 65 and retires.

[45] The purpose of an award of damages for wrongful dismissal is to give the

employee what she needs to support herself until she finds a new job. That risk

has to be understood as meaning what she reasonably needs in the

circumstances. Absent a fixed term contract, the risk of an employer’s having to

pay an amount calculated with respect to that purpose is limited by the fact that,

both generally and in this case, an employer does not guarantee employment to

retirement.

[46] A contracting party assumes certain risks in making a contract. These risks

are generally fixed when the contract is made. In the case of an employment

contract, the risk the employer assumes is that, if an employee is dismissed

without notice or cause, the employer must pay what it would have had to pay

the employee during the period of notice. In an employment situation, the period

may change as time goes by so that the actual size of the payment the employer

must make cannot be known until the event occurs. Even then, the initial
                                              Page: 19


assumption of risk does not change: only the calculation of the consequences of

the risk changes over time.

[47] This argument is the understanding behind Hadley v. Baxendale (1854), 156

E.R. 145. The promisor is liable for the ordinary losses the promisor could have

foreseen. Beyond that point, the promisor is not liable. This approach to

damages governs damages for wrongful dismissal.4

[48] Applied Consumer accepted the risk that, if it dismissed Ms. Strudwick

without notice or cause, it would have to pay her an amount fixed in accordance

with the Bardal factors relevant at the time of dismissal. It did not accept, and

cannot be held to have accepted, the risk that, in dismissing a 56-year-old

woman, it would have to pay her until she retired. Put another way, it cannot be

the law that Applied Consumer could not have dismissed Ms. Strudwick with

notice but had to employ her until she reached the age of 65.

[49] I should indicate that I am of the view that the trial judge did err in awarding

“Wallace” damages by arbitrarily extending the notice period by four months, as

opposed to determining an award that reflects the actual damages as required by

Keays. However, Applied Consumer has not cross-appealed damages, so there

is no challenge to this additional four months of reasonable notice. I will return to



4
 In conducting this analysis, I have considered Angela Swan’s paper, “At the Intersection of Contract and
Tort: Risk, Valuation, Interest and Timing” delivered at the National Judicial Institute’s seminar on
Common Law Rights and Remedies (19 May 2016), which helpfully canvasses this issue.
                                    Page: 20


the impact of this amount later in these reasons where I deal with aggravated

damages.

         (c) Cost of Replacing Benefits that would have been provided

            during the Notice Period

[50] Ms. Strudwick claimed additional damages for wrongful dismissal based on

the loss of collateral benefits associated with her employment. The motion judge

noted that the evidence she tendered in support of this claim indicated an annual

cost of replacement of $3,024.96. According to the motion judge, based on a 24-

month notice period, Ms. Strudwick was entitled to an additional $6,049.92.

[51] Ms. Strudwick does not challenge this part of the motion judge’s damage

award – either the number of months or the manner of calculation. Applied

Consumer has not cross-appealed the quantum. I therefore see no reason to

interfere with the amount awarded under this heading.

         (d) Code Violations

[52] The motion judge awarded Ms. Strudwick damages under s. 46.1 of the

Code. Based on various cases cited by Ms. Strudwick’s counsel, the motion

judge identified a range of awards between $2,000 and $30,000. Referring to

Applied Consumer’s “abject failure to consider or accommodate [Ms. Strudwick]

despite repeated, reasonable and varied requests” and their being no evidence
                                     Page: 21


to contradict Applied Consumer’s “unconscionable conduct”, the motion judge

assessed damages under this category at $20,000.

[53] Ms. Strudwick argues that the motion judge’s award of $20,000 was too low

considering her particular vulnerability and the seriousness of the offensive

treatment, including the bad faith nature of Applied Consumer’s treatment of her.

The Governing Principles

[54] Section 46.1(1) of the Code states:

            46.1 (1) If, in a civil proceeding in a court, the court finds that a party
            to the proceeding has infringed a right under Part I of another party
            to the proceeding, the court may make either of the following orders,
            or both:

                  1. An order directing the party who infringed the right to pay
                  monetary compensation to the party whose right was infringed
                  for loss arising out of the infringement, including compensation
                  for injury to dignity, feelings and self-respect.

                  2. An order directing the party who infringed the right to make
                  restitution to the party whose right was infringed, other than
                  through monetary compensation, for loss arising out of the
                  infringement, including restitution for injury to dignity, feelings
                  and self-respect.

[55] In Keays, at para. 63, Bastarache J. noted that the restriction of monetary

compensation to loss arising out of the infringement confirmed the Code’s

remedial as opposed to punitive thrust. Thus damages in this context are not

designed to punish the employer but rather remedy the effects of discrimination.
                                     Page: 22


[56] Section 46.1 mirrors the remedial powers given to the Ontario Human Rights

Tribunal (the “Tribunal”) under s. 45.2, which pertains where a person has

applied to the Tribunal for an order. That section states:

             45.2 (1) On an application under section 34, the Tribunal may make
             one or more of the following orders if the Tribunal determines that a
             party to the application has infringed a right under Part I of another
             party to the application:

                   1. An order directing the party who infringed the right to pay
                   monetary compensation to the party whose right was infringed
                   for loss arising out of the infringement, including compensation
                   for injury to dignity, feelings and self-respect.

                   2. An order directing the party who infringed the right to make
                   restitution to the party whose right was infringed, other than
                   through monetary compensation, for loss arising out of the
                   infringement, including restitution for injury to dignity, feelings
                   and self-respect.

                   3. An order directing any party to the application to do
                   anything that, in the opinion of the Tribunal, the party ought to
                   do to promote compliance with this Act. [Emphasis added.]

[57] In Lane v. ADGA Group Consultants Inc. (2008), 91 O.R. (3d) 649, the

Divisional Court outlined the relevant principles applicable to assessing damages

under the Code. Although Lane was decided under what was then s. 41(1) of the

Code, the section, while not identical in wording, conveyed similar powers:

             41. (1) Where the Tribunal, after a hearing, finds that a right of the
             complainant under Part I has been infringed and that the
             infringement is a contravention of section 9 by a party to the
             proceeding, the Tribunal may, by order,

                   (a) direct the party to do anything that, in the opinion of the
                   Tribunal, the party ought to do to achieve compliance with this
                                     Page: 23


                   Act, both in respect of the complaint and in respect of future
                   practices; and

                   (b) direct the party to make restitution, including monetary
                   compensation, for loss arising out of the infringement, and,
                   where the infringement has been engaged in wilfully or
                   recklessly, monetary compensation may include an award, not
                   exceeding $10,000, for mental anguish.

[58] Writing for the court, Ferrier J. characterized the damages awarded under s.

41(1)(b) as “general damages to compensate for the intrinsic value of the

infringement of rights under the [Code]; it is compensation for the loss of the right

to be free from discrimination and the experience of victimization”: Lane, at

para. 149.

[59] In outlining the considerations with respect to quantum, Ferrier J. stated, at

paras. 153-54:

             This court has recognized that there is no ceiling on
             awards of general damages under the [Code].
             Furthermore, Human Rights Tribunals must ensure that
             the quantum of general damages is not set too low,
             since doing so would trivialize the social importance of
             the [Code] by effectively creating a “licence fee” to
             discriminate.

             Among the factors that Tribunals should consider when
             awarding general damages are humiliation; hurt
             feelings; the loss of self-respect, dignity and confidence
             by the complainant; the experience of victimization; the
             vulnerability of the complainant; and the seriousness of
             the offensive treatment. [Citations omitted.]

[60] Although Lane does not deal specifically with s. 46.1, in my view the

similarity between the remedial authority granted under the two provisions
                                   Page: 24


supports its application in the s. 46.1 context. And, in several decisions

exercising jurisdiction under s. 46.1, the Superior Court has looked to the

decision in Lane for guidance in assessing damages for human rights claims

raised in conjunction with a wrongful dismissal claim: Wilson v. Solis Mexican

Foods Inc., 2013 ONSC 5799; Silvera v. Olympia Jewellery Corp., 2015 ONSC

3760.

[61] The Tribunal expanded on the factors listed in Lane in Arunachalam v. Best

Buy Canada, 2010 HRTO 1880, at paras 51-54:

            Cases with equivalent facts should lead to an equivalent
            range of compensation, recognizing, of course, that
            each set of circumstances is unique. Uniform principles
            must be applied to determine which types of cases are
            more or less serious. Of course there will always be an
            element of subjective evaluation in translating
            circumstances to dollars, but the Tribunal has a
            responsibility to the community and parties appearing
            before it to ensure that the range of damages based on
            given facts is predictable and principled….

            The Tribunal’s jurisprudence over the two years since
            the new damages provision took effect has primarily
            applied two criteria in making the global evaluation of
            the appropriate damages for injury to dignity, feelings
            and self-respect: the objective seriousness of the
            conduct and the effect on the particular applicant who
            experienced discrimination: see, in particular, Seguin v.
            Great Blue Heron Charity Casino, 2009 HRTO 940 at
            para. 16 (CanLII).

            The first criterion recognizes that injury to dignity,
            feelings, and self[-]respect is generally more serious
            depending, objectively, upon what occurred. For
            example, dismissal from employment for discriminatory
                                    Page: 25


            reasons usually affects dignity more than a comment
            made on one occasion. Losing long-term employment
            because of discrimination is typically more harmful than
            losing a new job. The more prolonged, hurtful, and
            serious harassing comments are, the greater the injury
            to dignity, feelings and self-respect.

            The second criterion recognizes the applicant’s
            particular experience in response to the discrimination.
            Damages will be generally at the high end of the
            relevant range when the applicant has experienced
            particular emotional difficulties as a result of the event,
            and when his or her particular circumstances make the
            effects particularly serious. Some of the relevant
            considerations in relation to this factor are discussed in
            Sanford v. Koop, 2005 HRTO 53 (CanLII) at paras. 34-
            38. [Emphasis added.]

[62] The considerations discussed in Sanford, at para. 38, include:

             the immediate impact of the discrimination and/or harassment on

               the complainant’s emotional and/or physical health;

             the ongoing impact of the discrimination and/or harassment on

               the complainant’s emotional and/or physical health;

             the complainant’s vulnerability;

             objections to the offensive conduct;

             the respondent’s knowledge that the conduct was not only

               unwelcome but viewed as harassment or discrimination;

             the degree of anxiety the conduct caused; and

             the frequency and intensity of the conduct.
                                    Page: 26


The Principles Applied

[63] With respect, I view the motion judge’s analysis under this head of damages

as being flawed in two respects.

[64] First, while the motion judge noted that Applied Consumer’s conduct was

“unconscionable”, suggesting he found it to be objectively serious, he failed to

consider the impact of the discrimination on Ms. Strudwick. As a result, he did not

take into account:

             Ms.     Strudwick’s   immediate    feelings   of   isolation,   anxiety,

               stigmatization and humiliation, which were accompanied by

               physical symptoms including loss of appetite, exhaustion and

               headaches;

             Ms. Strudwick’s subsequent diagnosis of depression, anxiety and

               an adjustment disorder;

             Ms. Strudwick’s vulnerability, including that she had only recently

               become deaf and her reliance on employment with Applied

               Consumer to support herself; and

             that Ms. Strudwick did not object to offensive conduct that went

               on for many months, for fear of losing her job.

[65] The effect of Applied Consumer’s victimization of Ms. Strudwick was both

profound and prolonged. The evidence demonstrated that she suffered
                                      Page: 27


significant emotional and physical difficulties as a result of Applied Consumer’s

abusive treatment of her. Her circumstances, as a widow who had acquired a

serious disability late in life and who had no other source of income, made the

effects of the discrimination particularly severe.

[66] Second, while he considered Applied Consumer’s “abject failure” to

accommodate Ms. Strudwick, the motion judge erred, in my view, by not taking

into account an important exacerbating factor – that the company’s victimization

of Ms. Strudwick went beyond failing to accommodate her hearing loss; much of

the abuse was actually designed to increase the difficulties she was experiencing

at work.

[67] As I will explain, Applied Consumer is vicariously liable for this harassment.

[68] Section 46.3(1) of the Code provides for the vicarious liability of corporations

for the acts of their officers, employees or agents. While a corporation cannot be

held vicariously liable for the acts of its employees, agents or officers when it

comes to harassment, the failure of management to deal with the harassment,

thereby creating a poisoned work environment, is a violation under s. 5(1) of the

Code for which the corporation can be held vicariously liable: Farris v. Staubach

Ontario Inc., 2012 ONSC 3876, 294 O.A.C. 187 (Div. Ct.), at para. 33.

Furthermore, if the individual responsible for the harassment is a directing mind
                                     Page: 28


of the corporation, then the corporation can also be held liable for the individual

acts of harassment: Farris, at para. 33.

[69] Mr. Hoffman, responsible for managing the company in Mr. Berta’s absence,

appears to have been the primary participant in the harassment of Ms. Strudwick.

However, he was not the only employee involved in the abuse. Ms. Camilleri

featured prominently in Ms. Strudwick’s despicable treatment. Sadly, other

employees were made to participate in the harassment in at least one way, as

the evidence indicates that Ms. Camilleri would demand that other workers call

Ms. Strudwick, even though she could not answer. Ms. Camilleri would then

stand over these employees to ensure they carried out her orders designed to

further humiliate Ms. Strudwick. Fearful of themselves becoming the target of

Mr. Hoffman and Ms. Camilleri’s ire, the other employees began avoiding

Ms. Strudwick.

[70] Thus not only did a managing employee participate in the harassment, he

failed to address the harassment perpetrated by another employee. The result

was a highly poisoned work environment.

[71] As a consequence of these two errors, this court is obliged to interfere.

[72] In order to determine the appropriate damage award in this aspect of the

claim, it is helpful to examine the range of compensation that has been awarded

in similar cases. This review should be by no means determinative of the ultimate
                                      Page: 29


award, however, as I agree with Ferrier J.’s observation in Lane that there should

be no cap on damages arising from the violation of an individual’s human rights.

The circumstances surrounding the victim and the impact of the abuse are too

vast to responsibly identify any upper limit.

[73] Budd v. 783720 Ontario Inc., 2015 HRTO 825, is relevant for its own

contribution to the range of damages under this head and for the Tribunal’s

canvas of several decisions involving discrimination on the basis of disability.

There, the applicant, a five-year employee of the respondent company, was

deemed to have quit after she missed work because of an episode of acute

anxiety and depression. She did not suffer long-term physical or psychological

consequences. In awarding the applicant $25,000, the Tribunal considered the

following case law, at paras. 269-71:

             In Simpson v. Commissionaires (Great Lakes), 2009
             HRTO 1362, the applicant was awarded $10,000 for
             compensation for injury to dignity, feelings and self-
             respect where the respondent failed to properly
             consider the applicant’s need for disability-related
             accommodation. But in Simpson, the applicant
             continued in her employment with the respondent.

             In Krieger v. Toronto Police Services Board, 2010
             HRTO 1361, the Tribunal awarded $35,000 for
             compensation for injury to dignity, feelings and self-
             respect where the respondent failed to accommodate
             the applicant’s post-traumatic stress disorder and
             terminated his employment for reasons connected to his
             disability. However, that case involved a lengthy
             discriminatory period of suspension from work which
             exacerbated the impact on the applicant.
                                     Page: 30


             In Lopetegui v. 680247 Ontario, 2009 HRTO 1248, the
             Tribunal awarded $20,000 where the applicant was
             unable to work as a result of injuries sustained in a car
             accident. He provided the respondent with medical
             documentation indicating he was temporarily unable to
             work and requested modified duties. The respondent
             refused to provide modified work and subsequently
             terminated his employment in part because he had
             taken a leave of absence without permission.

[74] In my view, the circumstances here require damages in excess of those

awarded in these cases.

[75] As to the objective seriousness of the conduct, as previously described,

Applied Consumer’s conduct was not a one off. Applied Consumer refused every

one of Ms. Strudwick’s requests for accommodation, even those she offered to

pay for herself. It then took steps to exacerbate the impact of her deafness on

her ability to perform her job to force her to resign. When that did not work, the

company fired her for a frivolous and particularly offensive reason and in a

manner intended to cause maximum embarrassment.

[76] The effect of this malicious and heartless treatment on Ms. Strudwick was

significant, as outlined above at para. 64. I will not repeat that analysis here, but

needless to say Ms. Strudwick suffered humiliation and the loss of self-respect,

dignity and confidence as a direct result of Applied Consumer’s conduct.

[77] These circumstances, considered in the light of the cases referred to above

and corresponding awards, lead me to conclude that an award of $40,000 is

warranted under this head of damages.
                                    Page: 31


          (e) Intentional Infliction of Mental Distress

[78] The motion judge, citing Boucher v. Wal-Mart Canada Corp., 2014 ONCA

419, 120 O.R. (3d) 481, at para. 41, pointed to the elements that must be proven

in order to make out the tort of intentional infliction of mental suffering - the

defendant’s conduct must have been flagrant and outrageous, and calculated to

harm the plaintiff and it must have caused the plaintiff to suffer a visible and

provable illness.

[79] The motion judge found that this test was met “with regard to the treatment

to which [Ms. Strudwick] was subjected after she became deaf until her

dismissal.” He accepted that Applied Consumer’s conduct caused Ms. Strudwick

to suffer an adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood,

requiring psychological treatment. He awarded $18,984 to Ms. Strudwick to

reimburse her for the cost of her cognitive behavioural therapy sessions.

[80] Ms. Strudwick argues that this amount is inadequate given Applied

Consumer’s egregious conduct and the nature of the mental distress caused.

She also submits that the motion judge erred by awarding damages based solely

on the costs of her treatment by failing to award any compensation for the injury

itself. Consequently, she seeks damages of $150,000 for this tort.

[81] Ms. Strudwick also submits that the evidence before the trial judge was that

the therapy sessions would be far more effective if she had sign language
                                      Page: 32


interpretation, resulting in a further cost of $10,440 for total therapy costs of

$29,424 rather than $18,984.

The Governing Principles

[82] After the tort of intentional infliction of mental suffering has been established,

the resulting illness provides the measureable damages, and the ordinary

principles of assessment for damages relating to personal injuries apply. An

individual may therefore recover pecuniary losses, including medical expenses,

and non-pecuniary losses, including pain and suffering and loss of amenities of

life: Remedies in Tort, ed. by Linda D. Rainaldi, loose-leaf (Toronto: Thomson

Reuters Canada Ltd., 2016), at p. 10-24.

The Principles Applied

[83] In my view, the motion judge erred in two ways in his assessment of

damages for the tort of intentional infliction of mental distress.

[84] First, he failed to consider the increased costs of therapy resulting from

Ms. Strudwick’s permanent deafness. The evidence before him established that

optimal treatment for Ms. Strudwick would involve a sign language interpreter, or

a therapist able to utilize sign language. This evidence also included the current

rates for the services of an American Sign Language interpreter as outlined by

the Ontario Hearing Society: $120 per interpreter for up to two hours of service,

plus an Assignment Coordination Fee of $25 per request.
                                       Page: 33


[85] The motion judge accepted that Ms. Strudwick required 18 months of weekly

cognitive behavioural therapy. This works out to approximately 78 weeks of

therapy. Assuming a 45-minute session, as recommended before the motion

judge, the weekly cost for an interpreter would be $145. This results in an

additional $11,310 in damages.

[86] Second, the motion judge failed to consider the non-pecuniary losses

flowing from Applied Consumer’s intentional infliction of mental distress upon

Ms. Strudwick. I am aware of the concerns of double recovery under this head of

damage, given the role Mr. Hoffman’s misconduct plays in the determination of

damages for the Code violations and aggravated damages. Nevertheless, I

would award an additional $5,000 to address Ms. Strudwick’s pain and suffering,

and loss of enjoyment of life.

[87] As a result, I would award a total of $35,294 in damages for the tort of

intentional infliction of mental suffering.

          (f) Aggravated Damages

[88] The motion judge, citing Boucher, described aggravated damages as a

compensatory part of contract damages intended to address “the additional harm

suffered because of the way in which the contract was breached”. Recognizing

that such damages are to address employer conduct that is “unfair or is in bad

faith”, the motion judge identified the concern over double recovery arising out of
                                     Page: 34


awarding such damages in addition to those awarded based on pay in lieu of

notice, the breach of the Code and the tort of intentional infliction of mental

distress, and declined to make any award under this head of damage.

[89] Ms. Strudwick argues that the manner of dismissal here was more egregious

than in Boucher and submits that this court should award $200,000 for

aggravated damages.

The Governing Principles

[90] In Keays, at paras. 50-55, Bastarache J. traced the development of

damages for conduct in the termination of employment and concluded, at

para. 57, that “[d]amages resulting from the manner of dismissal must then be

available only if they result from the circumstances described in Wallace, namely

where the employer engages in conduct during the course of dismissal that is

‘unfair or is in bad faith by being, for example, untruthful, misleading or unduly

insensitive’”. As the court in Wallace held employers to an obligation of good faith

and fair dealing in the manner of dismissal, failure to act in such a manner can

lead to foreseeable, compensable damages: Keays, at para. 58.

[91] In terms of quantifying damages resulting from the manner of termination,

Bastarache J. stated, at para. 59:

            [T]here is no reason to retain the distinction between
            “true aggravated damages” resulting from a separate
            cause of action and moral damages resulting from
            conduct in the manner of termination. Damages
                                     Page: 35


            attributable to conduct in the manner of dismissal are
            always to be awarded under the Hadley principle.
            Moreover, in cases where damages are awarded, no
            extension of the notice period is to be used to determine
            the proper amount to be paid. The amount is to be fixed
            according to the same principles and in the same way
            as in all other cases dealing with moral damages. Thus,
            if the employee can prove that the manner of dismissal
            caused mental distress that was in the contemplation of
            the parties, those damages will be awarded not through
            an arbitrary extension of the notice period, but through
            an award that reflects the actual damages.

[92] Finally, Bastarache J. cautioned that courts must take care to retain the

fundamental nature of damages for conduct in dismissal. In the case of damages

for the manner of dismissal, that means remembering that the award is

compensatory and avoiding the pitfall of double-compensation or double-

punishment: Keays, at para. 60.

The Principles Applied

[93] I agree with the motion judge that there is some overlap between the

damages Ms. Strudwick claims under this head of damages and those awarded

for wrongful dismissal (in particular, the $8,400.18 awarded for the “Wallace

factor”), the violation of the Code and the tort of intentional infliction of mental

distress.

[94] However, given the extreme bad faith and unfair treatment exhibited by

Applied Consumer in the manner in which it dismissed Ms. Strudwick and its
                                     Page: 36


impact on her, I am of the view that the motion judge erred in holding that there

was a complete overlap.

[95] In terms of the appropriate amount for aggravated damages, this case is

similar to Boucher, in which this court upheld a $200,000 aggravated damages

award against Wal-Mart. In Boucher, the damage award flowed from the manner

in which Wal-Mart dealt with the misconduct of one of its employees,

Mr. Pinnock, and Ms. Boucher’s complaints about that misconduct. As Laskin

J.A. explained, at para. 72:

             Wal-Mart took no steps to bring an end to Pinnock’s
             misconduct. It did not take Boucher’s complaints
             seriously, finding them unsubstantiated despite
             substantial evidence from co-workers that they were
             well-founded. It failed to enforce its workplace policies,
             which on their face were designed to protect employees
             from the kind of treatment Pinnock subjected Boucher
             to. And it threatened Boucher with retaliation for making
             her complaints, an especially vindictive act. Despite all
             of this Boucher was willing to continue to work at the
             store if Wal-Mart addressed her complaints about
             Pinnock. Only when Wal-Mart refused to do so, did
             Boucher resign. These considerations show that Wal-
             Mart’s own conduct justified a separate and substantial
             award for aggravated damages.

[96] In response to Mr. Pinnock’s conduct and Wal-Mart’s failure to do anything

about it, Ms. Boucher experienced stress, could not eat or sleep, and suffered

from various medical symptoms, including weight loss. She was prescribed a

sedative and referred to a psychiatrist. Her symptoms cleared up once

Mr. Pinnock was no longer a part of her life: Boucher, at paras. 37-38, 52.
                                    Page: 37


[97] At a similarly high end of the scale, in Pate Estate v. Galway-Cavendish and

Harvey (Township), 2013 ONCA 669, 117 O.R. (3d) 481, the respondent,

Mr. Pate, was awarded $100,000 for mental distress ($75,000 in aggravated

damages plus $25,000 in Wallace damages). The appellant did not appeal that

award. Mr. Pate had been terminated on the alleged basis that his employer had

uncovered discrepancies with respect to building permit fees. Mr. Pate was not

provided with particulars, but told that if he resigned, the Township would not

contact the police. Mr. Pate refused to resign and his employment was

terminated. The appellant in that case subsequently pressured individuals within

the O.P.P. to lay charges. Mr. Pate was acquitted, but he remained in the public

spotlight for three years and did not obtain employment in the municipal field

again.

[98] At a different end of the scale, the court in Middleton v. Highlands East

(Municipality), 2013 ONSC 763, awarded $30,000 in aggravated damages where

the plaintiff received no procedural fairness (being terminated without

investigation into the concerns prompting the termination and without being

advised of the concerns), was not paid his statutory minimums, was not provided

with a letter of recommendation, and had a record of employment stating he did

not meet the expectations of his position. He suffered embarrassment, damage

to his self-worth and self-esteem, interference with his sleep and strains in his

relationships with others.
                                               Page: 38


[99] In my view, Applied Consumer’s conduct here was just as egregious as Wal-

Mart’s conduct in Boucher, almost as reprehensible as the Township’s conduct in

Pate Estate and considerably worse than that in Middleton.5

[100] I am aware that this conduct has been discussed in detail earlier in these

reasons; but it is important to bear in mind certain relevant aspects in order to put

my view of the appropriate quantum of aggravated damages in perspective.

[101] In the immediate lead-up to her dismissal, Ms. Strudwick was confronted in

front of an estimated 13 other employees, yelled at and called a “goddamned

fool”. She was then informed of her termination for a senseless reason.

Paperwork had been prepared by the company that was designed to deprive her

of various legal rights. When she would not sign, she was not given money the

company then owed her. She was further humiliated by having to gather her

belongings and leave under the stares of co-workers.

[102] The abuse did not cease after termination. Government intervention was

needed before Applied Consumer gave Ms. Strudwick the pay it owed her at the

time of dismissal. Then the company tendered a record of employment that

delayed Ms. Strudwick’s entitlement to receive employment insurance.




5
  I recognize that the damages awarded in Boucher were larger than those in Pate Estate. I would note,
however, that the damages in Boucher were awarded by a jury, and this court was “not persuaded that
the jury’s view of the amount [was] so plainly unreasonable that it ought to [have been reduced]”: para.
77. The damages in Pate Estate, in contrast, were awarded by the trial judge and were not appealed.
                                    Page: 39


[103] This conduct resulted in lasting psychological harm to Ms. Strudwick. As

previously noted, she was diagnosed with an adjustment disorder with mixed

anxiety and depressed mood requiring prolonged weekly cognitive behavioural

therapy.

[104] Taking all of this abuse into account, I would award Ms. Strudwick $70,000

for aggravated damages. From this amount the award of $8,400.18 for the

“Wallace” factor must be deducted to prevent overlap, resulting in a further

$61,599.82 under this head of damages.

           (g) Punitive Damages

[105] The motion judge identified this aspect of Ms. Strudwick’s claim as dealing

with the independent and actionable wrong the Supreme Court addressed in

Whiten. He emphasized, among other things, that such damages are the

exception, designed to respond to highly reprehensible conduct to mark the

community’s condemnation and deter others from such conduct. The motion

judge noted that punitive damages should be awarded only when compensatory

damages are insufficient.

[106] The motion judge held that Applied Consumer’s misconduct was

deliberate. It was designed to force Ms. Strudwick to quit her job. Furthermore,

the abuse persisted for six months prior to her dismissal that the company
                                     Page: 40


attempted to justify on the inane and insulting basis that she misbehaved at the

Toastmasters’ event.

[107] The motion judge recognized the relevance of the impact of any such

award on the financial wherewithal of the wrongdoer.

[108] Against this background the motion judge found that the approximately

$94,940 he had awarded under the other heads of damage was insufficient to

deter others from engaging in conduct of this nature. On this basis he assessed

punitive damages at $15,000.

[109] Ms. Strudwick submits that the motion judge erred in failing to take into

account the manner in which Applied Consumer responded to her legitimate

claims arising out of her wrongful dismissal and related treatment and overall

awarded damages in this category that are manifestly too low. She asks this

court to award her $150,000 for punitive damages.

The Governing Principles

[110] In Keays, at para. 62, Bastarache J. succinctly reviewed the evolution of

punitive damages:

            In Vorvis, McIntyre J., for the majority, held that punitive
            damages are recoverable provided the defendant’s
            conduct said to give rise to the claim is itself “an
            actionable wrong”. This position stood until 2002 when
            my colleague Binnie J., writing for the majority, dealt
            comprehensively with the issue of punitive damages in
            the context of the Whiten case. He specified that an
                                    Page: 41


            “actionable wrong” within the Vorvis rule does not
            require an independent tort and that a breach of the
            contractual duty of good faith can qualify as an
            independent wrong. Binnie J. concluded, at para. 82,
            that “[a]n independent actionable wrong is required, but
            it can be found in the breach of a distinct and separate
            contractual provision or other duty such as a fiduciary
            obligation.”

[111] Bastarache J. also repeated the court’s earlier cautionary notes as to the

awarding of punitive damages, stating, at para. 68:

            [T]his Court has stated that punitive damages should
            “receive the most careful consideration and the
            discretion to award them should be most cautiously
            exercised” (Vorvis, at pp. 1104-5). Courts should only
            resort to punitive damages in exceptional cases
            (Whiten, at para. 69). The independent actionable
            wrong requirement is but one of many factors that merit
            careful consideration by the courts in allocating punitive
            damages. Another important thing to be considered is
            that conduct meriting punitive damages awards must be
            “harsh, vindictive, reprehensible and malicious”, as well
            as “extreme in its nature and such that by any
            reasonable standard it is deserving of full condemnation
            and punishment” (Vorvis, at p. 1108).

[112] In distinguishing punitive damages from damages for conduct in the

manner of dismissal, so as to avoid duplication in damage awards, Bastarache J.

explained, at para. 62, that “[d]amages for conduct in the manner of dismissal are

compensatory; punitive damages are restricted to advertent wrongful acts that

are so malicious and outrageous that they are deserving of punishment on their

own” (emphasis added). He noted that, even had the circumstances in Keays

justified an award of punitive damages, the lower courts should have questioned
                                    Page: 42


“whether the allocation of punitive damages was necessary for the purposes of

denunciation, deterrence and retribution, once the damages for conduct in

dismissal were awarded”, given the same conduct underlay the awards under

both heads of damages: para. 69.

The Principles Applied

[113] It is true that the same conduct underlies the awards under both punitive

damages and damages for conduct in dismissal. However, such will invariably be

the situation. What justifies punitive damages ultimately is the conclusion, in

exceptional cases, that compensatory damages are simply insufficient to respond

to the conduct being addressed.

[114] I agree with the motion judge that this is such a case. In my view, Applied

Consumer’s conduct in relation to Ms. Strudwick, who the evidence

demonstrates was a highly regarded, long-term, faithful employee who became

profoundly disabled late in life, can only be described as a marked departure

from any conceivable standard of decent behaviour. Such conduct deserves

punishment on its own. The imposition of punitive damages is necessary for the

purposes of denunciation, deterrence and retribution.

[115] With respect, however, I am of the view that in assessing the quantum of

punitive damages the motion judge fell into legal error in two respects. First, he

viewed Applied Consumer’s failure to try to conceal the misconduct or failure to
                                              Page: 43


profit from the misconduct as mitigating the company’s level of blameworthiness.

I disagree. In my view, in the circumstances of this case, these factors are

neutral. Second, the motion judge over-emphasized the impact of a damage

award on the company, particularly given the lack of evidence about the

company’s financial situation. In my view, these errors led the motion judge to

award an amount insufficient to accomplish the objectives of retribution,

deterrence and denunciation. As a result, this court is justified in conducting its

own analysis of the appropriate quantum of punitive damages.

[116] As I would already hold Applied Consumer responsible for significant

compensatory damages for its treatment of Ms. Strudwick, as indicated above, it

is necessary to determine the appropriate amount of punitive damages having

regard to this amount. I am also mindful of the impact of the additional amounts

awarded, totaling $192,850.79, and that punitive damages can only be awarded

where the aggregate amount of compensatory damages is insufficient to

accomplish the objectives of retribution, denunciation and deterrence.

[117] In Boucher, involving similar circumstances, this court reduced amounts

awarded by the jury to a total of $110,000 for punitive damages.6 However, I

regard Applied Consumer’s conduct as being significantly more egregious than

that in Boucher. The misconduct lasted longer – in Boucher, it was six months;



6
    Representing a $100,000 award against Wal-Mart and a $10,000 award against Mr. Pinnock.
                                    Page: 44


here, Ms. Strudwick was victimized for years, taking into account her treatment

pre- and post-dismissal. I also note that, unlike in Boucher, the motion judge

specifically found that Applied Consumer embarked upon its campaign of abuse

to force Ms. Strudwick’s resignation.

[118] That said, the financial resources of Applied Consumer are of some

relevance. In Boucher, the employer was a very large multi-national corporation.

And, while the evidence is scant, the record does indicate that Applied Consumer

is a relatively small, family-held company with approximately 80 employees.

[119] Taking the various relevant factors into consideration, I would award

Ms. Strudwick $55,000 in punitive damages.

          (h) Total Damages

[120] The increases under the various heads of damages above result in a total

of $247,850.79. After subtracting the $6,049.92 awarded for the cost of replacing

benefits, the amount is $241,800.87. As Ms. Strudwick is limited by the amount

claimed in the statement of claim, I must reduce the overall total by $1,800.87.

As a result, the amount awarded would be $246,049.92.

APPEAL – CONCLUDING COMMENTS

[121] In my view, it is necessary to respond to Applied Consumer’s argument

that any penalties should not be visited on the company, but rather on

Mr. Hoffman.
                                     Page: 45


[122] I reject this argument. First, Applied Consumer was Ms. Strudwick’s

employer. Any damages flowing from her wrongful dismissal, and the manner in

which she was dismissed, are properly visited upon it.

[123] Second, in Applied Consumer’s own words, during Mr. Berta’s absence

Mr. Hoffman “took over running the business”. Applied Consumer cannot escape

responsibility for the actions of its agents. An employer is jointly and severally

liable for the tortious conduct of an agent acting with express, implied or apparent

authority: Gerald Fridman, Canadian Agency Law, 2nd ed. (Markham: LexisNexis

Canada Inc., 2012) at p. 294. And as discussed above, Applied Consumer is also

vicariously liable under the Code for Mr. Hoffman and Ms. Cavilleri’s harassment

of Ms. Strudwick based on her disability.

[124] Moreover, although Mr. Berta terminated the employment of Mr. Hoffman

following his return to work, Applied Consumer continued to do everything

possible to avoid complying with its obligations to Ms. Strudwick.

[125] One final point must be made clear. While I would allow the appeal and

increase the damages as indicated above, it is important to remember that I have

determined the amounts I would award in relation to the various heads of

damages in the light of my conclusion that the aggregate amount this court can

award is limited by the total amount claimed in the statement of claim.
                                    Page: 46


THE APPEAL AND CROSS-APPEAL ON COSTS

[126] In addressing costs, the motion judge expressed the view that an

inordinate amount of time had been spent on preparing the default judgment

materials. Mindful of the need to impose a “proportionate” amount of costs, that

were fair and reasonable in accordance with the principles in Boucher, the

motion judge fixed costs in the amount of $40,000 inclusive of disbursements

and applicable taxes.

[127] I see no error in this award of costs. I would therefore not give effect to

Ms. Strudwick’s submissions that they are too low or grant Applied Consumer

leave to appeal the costs award on the basis that the award is too high.

DISPOSITION

[128] For these reasons, I would allow the appeal, set aside the judgment and

substitute a judgment in the amount of $246,049.92. I would dismiss Applied

Consumer’s application for leave to appeal costs. Further to my review of the

parties’ costs submissions, I would award Ms. Strudwick her costs of this appeal

in the amount of $20,000 inclusive of disbursements and applicable taxes.




                                            “Gloria Epstein J.A.”
                                            “I agree Doherty J.A.”
                                            “I agree B.W. Miller J.A.”
Released: June 30, 2016 “DD”
