                    COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

                                   CITATION: Kiselman v. Klerer, 2022 ONCA 489
                                                                DATE: 20220622
                                                              DOCKET: C68608

                        Brown, Roberts and Paciocco JJ.A.

BETWEEN

                                    Uri Kiselman

                                                                 Plaintiff (Appellant)

                                         and

               Joel Klerer, aka (Owner of I.O.F. Business Furniture
      Manufacturing Inc.), Pamela Klerer and I.O.F. Intelligent Office Furniture

                                                         Defendants (Respondents)

J. Richard Forget, for the appellant

Daria Krysik, for the respondent Pamela Klerer

Eli Fellman, for the intervener Landlord and Tenant Board

No one appearing for the respondents Joel Klerer and I.O.F. Intelligent Office
Furniture

Heard: June 17, 2022

On appeal from the order of Justice Gregory M. Mulligan of the Divisional Court,
dated November 19, 2019, with reasons reported at 2019 ONSC 6668.

                            REASONS FOR DECISION

OVERVIEW

[1]    The appellant, Uri Kiselman, commenced a Small Claims Court claim

against the respondents, his former residential tenants. The claim was for
                                      Page: 2


$17,166.55 in total damages for the non-payment of rent, and for costs incurred to

repair undue damage that the appellant alleges the respondents caused to the

rental unit. A deputy Small Claims Court judge dismissed the claim for want of

jurisdiction. That decision was upheld on appeal to the Divisional Court. Leave to

appeal the Divisional Court decision was granted. At the end of the oral hearing,

we allowed the appeal with reasons to follow. These are our reasons.

THE MATERIAL FACTS

[2]   The relevant provisions of the Residential Tenancies Act, 2006, S.O. 2006

c. 17 [the “Residential Tenancies Act”] in force at the time the appellant initiated

his action confirmed that the Landlord and Tenant Board [“LTB”] had jurisdiction to

adjudicate claims for damages for rent arrears and for undue damage to a rental

unit if the claim was brought while the tenant was in possession of the rental unit.

It is not contested that the respondents were not in possession when the appellant

initiated his damages action in the Small Claims Court.

[3]   The respondents nonetheless brought a motion to dismiss the Small Claims

Court action for want of jurisdiction, arguing that the LTB retains jurisdiction over

undue damage actions even where a tenant is no longer in possession of a rental

unit if the landlord could, with due diligence, have discovered and initiated the

action while the tenant was still in possession. The respondents argued that the

appellant failed to exercise due diligence because he did not utilize his right of
                                      Page: 3


inspection while the respondents were in possession. Had he done so, he could

have discovered the damage and initiated the action before the LTB. In essence,

the respondents argued that landlords cannot rely on their failure to exercise due

diligence in order to evade the exclusive jurisdiction of the LTB.

[4]    The appellant opposed the dismissal motion, relying on the plain wording of

the material provisions of the Residential Tenancies Act then in force. He also

argued that the notion that actionable undue damage can be discovered with due

diligence while a tenant is still in possession of the rental unit makes no sense.

He argued that if a tenant repairs such damage before quitting the tenancy, there

is no basis to sue. Therefore, it is only after a tenant has left a rental unit without

repairing undue damage that such a claim can be discovered.

[5]    On September 5, 2017, a deputy Small Claims Court judge accepted the

respondents’ submissions and granted their motion to dismiss the appellant’s claim

for lack of jurisdiction.

[6]    The Divisional Court appeal judge upheld the decision of the deputy Small

Claims Court judge, but he applied different reasoning. He held that s. 168(2) of

the Residential Tenancies Act gives the LTB “exclusive jurisdiction to determine

claims of this type” because “nothing turns on the fact that the action was started

after the tenant was no longer in possession”.
                                             Page: 4


ANALYSIS

[7]    In order to have exclusive jurisdiction, a tribunal must first have jurisdiction.

The LTB did not have jurisdiction to adjudicate the claims that the appellant was

seeking to advance. The Divisional Court therefore erred in holding that the LTB

had exclusive jurisdiction and in dismissing the appeal.

[8]    At the relevant time, s. 87(1) of the Residential Tenancies Act, now repealed

and replaced,1 provided:

               87(1) A landlord may apply to the Board for an order for the payment
               of arrears of rent if,

                        (a) the tenant has not paid rent lawfully required under the
                       tenancy agreement; and

                        (b) the tenant is in possession of the rental unit. [Emphasis
                       added.]

[9]    Section 89(1), also now repealed and replaced,2 provided:

               89(1) A landlord may apply to the Board for an order requiring a tenant
               to pay reasonable costs that the landlord has incurred or will incur for
               the repair of or, where repairing is not reasonable, the replacement of
               damaged property, if the tenant, another occupant of the rental unit or
               a person whom the tenant permits in the residential complex wilfully
               or negligently causes undue damage to the rental unit or the
               residential complex and the tenant is in possession of the rental unit.
               [Emphasis added.]




1 Protecting Tenants and Strengthening Community Housing Act, 2020, S.O. 2020, c. 16, Sched 4,

s. 18(1), effective September 1, 2021.
2 Protecting Tenants and Strengthening Community Housing Act, 2020, S.O. 2020, c. 16, Sched 4,

s. 21(1), effective September 1, 2021.
                                      Page: 5


[10]   On a plain reading of these sections, the LTB only has jurisdiction over a

claim for the payment of rent, or for the recovery of the costs of repairing damage,

when the tenant is in possession of the rental unit.

[11]   Not surprisingly, in 1162994 Ontario Inc. v. Bakker, 2004 CanLII 59995

(Ont. C.A.), at para. 18, Doherty J.A. held with respect to the identically worded

predecessor provisions to s. 87(1) that the LTB does not have jurisdiction over

claims for arrears of rent where the connection between the tenant and the rental

unit has been severed. He explained that this is in keeping with the purpose of the

Residential Tenancies Act of encouraging “speedy, fair and efficient access to

justice in residential tenancy matters”: at paras. 17-18. He noted that once the

connection between the tenant and the rental unit has been severed, such claims

“are best resolved through more formal court processes”: at para. 18. Although

Doherty J.A. did not say so expressly, this follows from the fact that once the tenant

is no longer connected to the unit, the need for speedy access to justice will have

abated, removing the need to direct exclusive jurisdiction to the LTB.

[12]   Bakker has not been overturned and has been repeatedly followed,

including by the Divisional Court: see Capreit Limited Partnership v. Griffin, 2016

ONSC 5150 (Div. Ct.), at paras. 10-12; Kissell v. Milosevic, 2008 CanLII 27475

(Ont. Div. Ct.), at para. 3. This line of authority does not appear to have been cited

in the courts below.
                                      Page: 6


[13]   The respondents argue before us that this line of authority does not apply.

They rely instead on a line of Small Claims Court decisions, including Finney v.

Cepovski, 2015 CanLII 48918 (Ont. S.C.), at paras. 25-27 and Fong v. Lemieux,

2016 CanLII 30092 (Ont. S.C.), which hold that if a landlord has not exercised due

diligence in discovering damage to the rental unit while the tenant is still in

possession, the LTB retains jurisdiction even if the action was commenced after

the tenant is no longer in possession. The respondents maintain that Bakker is not

inconsistent with this line of authority because Bakker is a rent arrears case that

did not address jurisdiction over damage claims arising from undue damage to

rental units.

[14]   We disagree. The line of authority the respondents rely upon is inconsistent

with the clear language of former ss. 87(1) and 89(1) and should not be followed.

It is also inconsistent with the clear language of s. 23 of the Courts of Justice Act,

R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, which describes the jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court

based not on the exercise of due diligence but on the monetary amount of a claim.

Moreover, although Bakker dealt only with claims for rent arrears, its reasoning

applies to the former s. 89(1) relating to damage claims for undue damage to the

rental unit.

[15]   Given that the respondents had moved out and severed their connection to

the rental unit, the LTB does not have jurisdiction, let alone exclusive jurisdiction,
                                               Page: 7


over this litigation.3 Instead, the claims fall within the monetary jurisdiction of the

Small Claims Court. The Divisional Court appeal judge therefore erred in denying

the appeal from the decision of the deputy Small Claims Court judge, who also

erred in dismissing the landlord’s claim for want of jurisdiction.

CONCLUSION

[16]    The appeal is allowed, the decision setting aside the claim is set aside, and

this matter is to be restored to the trial list in Newmarket, to be heard on its merits.

[17]    As agreed between the parties, costs are payable to the appellant in the

amount of $3,500 inclusive of HST and disbursements.

                                                                               “David Brown J.A.”
                                                                               “L.B. Roberts J.A.”
                                                                         “David M. Paciocco J.A.”




3 We need not decide whether the LTB would have had jurisdiction over an identical claim had it

originated after September 1, 2021. We would be remiss, however, in failing to caution that the
amendments and transitional provisions in the Protecting Tenants and Strengthening Community Housing
Act, 2020 may have supported a different outcome in such circumstances.
