                    COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

                                   CITATION: Leroux v. Ontario, 2023 ONCA 314
                                                               DATE: 20230504
                                                             DOCKET: C70224

                        Doherty, Zarnett and Coroza JJ.A.

BETWEEN

                Marc Leroux as Litigation Guardian of Briana Leroux

                                                               Plaintiff/Respondent
                                                                          (Appellant)

                                        and

             His Majesty the King in Right of the Province of Ontario

                                                              Defendant/Appellant
                                                                    (Respondent)

                Proceeding under the Class Proceedings Act, 1992

Kirk Baert, Celeste Poltak, and Caitlin Leach, for the appellant

D. Brent McPherson, Vanessa Glasser, and Ravi Amarnath, for the respondent

Heard: September 22, 2022

On appeal from the order of the Divisional Court (Regional Senior Justice Mark L.
Edwards, dissenting in part, Justices David L. Corbett and Michael A. Penny),
dated March 26, 2021, with reasons reported at 2021 ONSC 2269, 484 C.R.R.
(2d) 67, and 2021 ONSC 4468, 75 C.C.L.T. (4th) 107, allowing an appeal from the
orders of Justice Edward P. Belobaba of the Superior Court of Justice, dated
December 14, 2018 and March 25, 2020, with reasons reported at
2018 ONSC 6452, 53 C.C.L.T. (4th) 228, and 2020 ONSC 1994, 63 C.C.L.T.
(4th) 219.

Zarnett J.A.:
                                               Page: 2


INTRODUCTION

[1]     The appellant, through her litigation guardian, commenced a proposed class

action against the Government of Ontario and moved for certification under s. 5(1)

of the Class Proceedings Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 6 (the “CPA”).1 The motion judge

granted certification. A majority of the Divisional Court reversed that order.

[2]     The proposed class is composed of adults with developmental disabilities

who, like the appellant, have been assessed and approved to receive three specific

types of supports and services under the Services and Supports to Promote the

Social Inclusion of Persons with Developmental Disabilities Act, 2008, S.O. 2008,

c. 14 (the “2008 Disabilities Act”), but did not receive them or experienced

substantial delays.

[3]     The motion judge held that the criteria for certification were met. In particular,

he was satisfied that the statement of claim disclosed a cause of action as required

by s. 5(1)(a) of the CPA, both for negligence and breach of s. 7 of the Canadian

Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which guarantees “the right to life, liberty and

security of the person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance

with the principles of fundamental justice”. Taking the facts alleged in the statement




1 The appellant has a severe developmental disability and accordingly is represented by her father,

Marc Leroux, who has acted as her litigation guardian throughout the proceedings.
                                                Page: 3


of claim as true, the motion judge was of the view that each claim had a reasonable

chance of success and neither was doomed to fail.2

[4]     The motion judge characterized the negligence claim as one complaining of

operational negligence rather than core policy decisions for which the government

enjoys immunity: “[t]he complaint, in a nutshell, is about the negligent operation of

a social assistance system that has approved the delivery of much-needed support

and services but then fails to follow up”. Although he was sceptical of the s. 7

Charter claim, he did not consider the appellant’s claim that Ontario’s conduct

deprived class members of “some measure of security of the person” to be

foreclosed by the existing jurisprudence. The motion judge also held that the

balance of the certification criteria under ss. 5(1)(b)-(e) had been satisfied.

[5]     The majority of the Divisional Court allowed Ontario’s appeal and set aside

the certification order. The Divisional Court was unanimous in its view that the s. 7

Charter claim was precluded by binding jurisprudence. In the majority’s view, the

negligence claim was also doomed to fail as it complained of core policy decisions

about the allocation of scarce resources. The dissenting judge would have




2 The motion judge considered a claim originally asserted in the statement of claim for breach of fiduciary

duty to be doomed to fail and struck it. After the motion judge’s decision, the appellant amended the
statement of claim to implement the motion judge’s decision in this respect. These reasons treat the
amended statement of claim as the operative pleading.
                                       Page: 4


permitted the negligence claim to continue on the basis that the motion judge

correctly characterized it as impugning operational rather than policy matters.

[6]   For the reasons that follow, I would allow the appeal, set aside the order of

the Divisional Court, and restore the motion judge’s order.

[7]   I agree with the motion judge and the dissenting judge in the Divisional Court

that the negligence claim does not impugn a core policy decision concerning the

allocation of scarce resources. As pleaded, the action alleges that, within existing

resources, Ontario has negligently implemented a program that has already

assessed and approved class members for the receipt of supports and services.

The majority of the Divisional Court erred in recharacterizing the appellant’s claim.

Taking the pleaded facts as true, it is not plain and obvious that the negligence

claim is one barred by core policy immunity, nor one in which no duty of care could

arguably arise.

[8]   I also agree with the conclusion of the motion judge that the s. 7 claim should

not be struck. The Divisional Court read that claim too narrowly, interpreting it as

one that only asserted that the deprivation of the s. 7 right to security of the person

stemmed from the failure to provide services or the existence of waitlists. Reading

the pleading generously, the claim also identifies the deprivation as originating

from Ontario’s allegedly ad hoc, unreasonable administration of waitlists for

persons who have already been assessed and approved for essential services.
                                      Page: 5


This state conduct allegedly causes psychological harm sufficiently profound to

deprive class members of their security of the person. A claim based on that fact

pattern has not been foreclosed by s. 7 jurisprudence.

BACKGROUND

(1)    The Pleaded Facts and Causes of Action

[9]    The statement of claim describes the appellant as a young adult residing in

Timmins, Ontario. She has a developmental disability and is non-verbal, requiring

24/7 support and services to meet her basic living needs.

[10]   The claim alleges that, prior to her eighteenth birthday in February 2016,

Ontario provided services to the appellant through the Ministry of Children and

Youth Services (the “MCYS”). Despite her needs not changing, the MCYS

terminated these services when the appellant turned 18 years old.

[11]   In anticipation of MCYS services ending, the appellant’s family applied

approximately six months before her eighteenth birthday for services and supports

under the 2008 Disabilities Act, which is administered by the Ministry of Community

and Social Services (the “MCSS”).

[12]   Section 3 of the 2008 Disabilities Act defines a person with a developmental

disability as someone with significant limitations in cognitive and adaptive

functioning that originated before the person reached 18, that are likely to be life-

long in nature, and that affect areas of major life activity, such as personal care,
                                                  Page: 6


language skills, learning abilities, or the capacity to live independently as an adult.

Under s. 14 of the statute, if an applicant is an adult who resides in Ontario, has a

developmental disability within the meaning of s. 3, and provides proof of the

disability, they are eligible for supports and services, which the pleadings refer to

as “Developmental Services”.

[13]    In August and September 2016, the appellant was assessed for her eligibility

under the 2008 Disabilities Act by the regional Developmental Services Ontario

(“DSO”) office in Timmins, for which Ontario is responsible. She was assessed as

eligible and approved by the DSO for Developmental Services. Despite this

approval, Ontario neither provided nor funded such services to meet her daily living

needs. Instead, the appellant was placed on a waitlist, referred to in the claim as

a “DSO Waitlist”, with no estimate as to the length of wait. The claim alleges that

the appellant has remained on a DSO waitlist, resulting in her receiving only the

supports and services that her family have been able to provide at their own

expense, through to the time of the commencement of the action in April 2017 and

its amendment in January 2019.3

[14]    On the basis that the appellant’s experience is one shared by others who

are similarly situated, the action is brought on behalf of the appellant and all other




3 Although not referred to in the pleading, the evidence on the certification motion referred to the appellant

obtaining emergency support for a limited time.
                                                Page: 7


persons who have, since July 2011, been assessed as eligible and approved for

services under the 2008 Disabilities Act, and subsequently placed on one of three

DSO waitlists (also known as “service registries”)4 for approved services:

(i) residential services and supports; (ii) caregiver respite services and supports,

and (iii) "Passport" funding.

[15]    The claim refers to and incorporates criticisms of the DSO waitlists found in

three reports. First, it quotes from the 2014 report of the Legislative Assembly’s

Select Committee on Developmental Services calling for the elimination of the

waitlists. Second, it cites a 2014 report of the Auditor General which notes

problems with the MCSS database, shortcomings in its computer system, as well

as the lack of a consistent prioritization process and methods to tie funding to

individuals' needs, and which called for the government to develop a consistent

prioritization and waitlist management process across the province. Third, it

references a 2016 Ombudsman Report decrying “interminable waitlist delays”.

[16]    The claim asserts two causes of action.

[17]    The first is in negligence. The nub of this cause of action appears in a

paragraph in the “Overview” section of the pleading. It reads:

                Ontario has through statute and conduct undertaken to
                provide adults with developmental disabilities the
                services, supports or direct funding, to provide for their


4 The motion judge noted, at para. 15 of his certification reasons, that Ontario conceded that service

registries were waitlists and the two terms are interchangeable.
                                      Page: 8


             most basic human needs and daily safety
             (‘Developmental Services’). In performance of this
             undertaking, adults with developmental disabilities are
             assessed and approved for Developmental Services, as
             prescribed by statute. Despite being assessed and
             approved for Developmental Services, the entitlement to
             such services is arbitrarily denied as a result of
             unreasonably managed waitlists, which are maintained
             by regional Developmental Services Ontario offices
             (‘DSO Waitlists’)”.

[18]   The claim later alleges that Ontario created, administered, supervised, and

managed the DSO waitlists during the class period. The claim asserts that Ontario

owed a duty of care to the class members, stating that it was in a relationship of

proximity with the class members, and that the harm suffered by class members

was reasonably foreseeable. The claim also alleges that Ontario breached the duty

of care in the way in which it administered, managed and supervised the DSO

waitlists. The particulars provided include:

             (a)   failing to act to reduce unreasonably long waitlist
             times which serve as an effective denial of approved
             Developmental Services;

             (b)  creating waitlists of indeterminate length for
             Developmental Services which are essential to the Class
             Member's basic human needs, safety and security;

             (c)     failing to have a consistent and rational scheme of
             prioritization for Class Members on the DSO Waitlists;

             (d)    failing to create a cohesive system to rationally and
             efficiently allocate pre-existing resources to Class
             Members on DSO Waitlists;
                                      Page: 9


             (e)    failing to provide class members with
             Developmental Services which class members are
             eligible and approved for pursuant to the 2008 Disabilities
             Act;

             (f)   arbitrarily cutting off existing Developmental
             Services to individuals when they reach the age of 18,
             regardless of pre-approval for such services and their
             continuing developmental disability;

             (g)  returning Class Members to a DSO Waitlist when
             Developmental Services are discontinued;

             (h)   failing to properly exercise discretion in
             determining an appropriate length of time for Class
             Members be subjected to a DSO Waitlist for approved
             Developmental Services; and

             (i)  failing to respond adequately, or at all, to
             complaints or recommendations which were made
             concerning the administration of DSO Waitlists.

[19]   The second cause of action alleged is a breach of s. 7 of the Charter. The

claim alleges that class members are eligible and have been approved for

Developmental Services which are essential to their life and security of the person,

and the unreasonable and indeterminate administration of DSO waitlists deprive

them of s. 7 rights. The claim lists the alleged harms suffered by the class

members, which includes “mental anguish” and the “development of new mental,

psychological or psychiatric disorders”.
                                    Page: 10


(2)    The Procedural History

i.     The Motion Judge’s Decision

[20]   The motion judge determined that the statement of claim properly alleged a

cause of action in negligence. As noted above, he viewed the crux of the complaint

to be about Ontario’s negligent operation of “a social assistance system that has

approved the delivery of much-needed support and services but then fails to follow

up”.

[21]   The motion judge noted that the design and funding of a social assistance

scheme is a matter for the legislature, not the courts. But he found that the

statement of claim was not complaining about inadequate funding or the need for

a greater allocation of resources. Instead, it was about “the negligent utilization

and administration of existing resources”. In the view of the motion judge, the

appellant was suing about “the indeterminate delays in the waitlisted services, the

flawed computer programs and bad databases and poor prioritization and

matching of available resources”. The complaint was “not one of funding but the

negligent operation of the existing system”.

[22]   The motion judge then turned to the requirement that a duty of care exist

and referred to the two-part Anns/Cooper test: Cooper v. Hobart, 2001 SCC 79,

[2001] 3 S.C.R. 537. Under that test, a plaintiff in a negligence action must show
                                     Page: 11


the presence of proximity and foreseeability, and the absence of policy

considerations that would negate the imposition of a duty of care.

[23]   The motion judge was of the view that it was not plain and obvious that

proximity could not be established. He referred to the allegations that every class

member interacted with Ontario in receiving support and services prior to

turning 18 and in applying and receiving approval for continuing support and

services under the 2008 Disabilities Act. In the motion judge’s view,

representations, direct contact, and reliance would have existed in the course of

the relationship.

[24]   The motion judge also considered that it was not plain and obvious that

policy considerations negated a duty of care on the alleged facts. He distinguished

two decisions − Wareham v. Ontario (Minister of Community and Social Services),

2008 ONCA 771, 93 O.R. (3d) 27, and Wynberg v. Ontario (2006), 82 O.R.

(3d) 561 (C.A.), leave to appeal refused, [2006] S.C.C.A. No. 441 − that were relied

on by Ontario to show no duty of care could exist. He held that the allegations in

this case are distinguishable from those advanced in Wareham and Wynberg and

were the type of allegations that those cases contemplated could support a viable

negligence action. Those allegations are: (i) the waitlists are not operated in

accordance with the statutory scheme; (ii) the delays are the result of the defaults

of Ontario’s employees who administer the program; (iii) the program as enacted

is capable of being administered more effectively without a further allocation of
                                     Page: 12


resources, and (iv) the focus of the complaint is on the operational failures in the

implementation of the program.

[25]   The motion judge was sceptical of the Charter claim, but held it was not plain

and obvious that the claim would fail. The conduct of the DSO offices and MCSS

would meet the state conduct requirement. It could possibly be concluded that the

conduct deprived the class members of “some measure of security of the person”.

Deprived was a broad enough term to encompass conduct that erected barriers to

something to which class members were entitled, and state caused delay could be

a deprivation in some circumstances. He distinguished the statement in Chaoulli

v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2005 SCC 35, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 791, at para. 104,

that the Charter does not confer a freestanding right to health care, noting that the

Supreme Court had gone on to confirm that a legislative scheme for health care

had to comply with the Charter and the appellant’s claim was in respect of services

and support that she had been approved to receive under the 2008 Disabilities Act.

[26]   The motion judge also was of the view that, in light of the appellant’s

allegations that the denial of benefits to which class members were entitled was

due to procedural unfairness and arbitrariness, it was not plain and obvious that

the deprivation occurred in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.

[27]   The motion judge also considered whether the other requirements for

certification were met. He found the class definition, common issues, preferable
                                     Page: 13


procedure and suitable representative plaintiff requirements under ss. 5(1)(b)-(e)

of the CPA were all satisfied.

[28]   Subsequent to the motion judge’s certification decision, the Ontario

legislature passed the Crown Liability and Proceedings Act, 2019, S.O. 2019, c. 7,

Sched. 17 (the “CLPA”). The Divisional Court, to which Ontario had appealed the

certification decision, referred the matter back to the motion judge to consider the

effect of the CLPA on the negligence claim. The motion judge noted that s. 11(4)

of the CLPA immunizes Ontario against negligence claims that relate to the making

of, or the failure to make, a decision respecting a policy matter, and s. 11(5)(c)

defines policy matter to “potentially include even operational negligence”. For a

number of reasons, including issues about whether the CLPA had retrospective

operation, the motion judge concluded that it was not plain and obvious that the

operational negligence claim asserted by the appellant was barred by the CLPA.

He added a common issue about the effect of the CLPA so it could be determined

at the common issues trial.

ii.    The Divisional Court Decision

[29]   The Divisional Court was unanimous in holding that the motion judge erred

when he determined that the Charter claim was not doomed to fail. Regional Senior

Justice Edwards, writing for the court on this issue, considered the jurisprudence

to have rejected the proposition that “security of the person includes and requires
                                      Page: 14


provision for the economic satisfaction of basic human needs”. He went on to hold

that what was actually alleged was a failure to positively provide benefits.

Therefore, even if security of the person was engaged, there was no legally

cognizable deprivation alleged as “[n]othing in the jurisprudence suggest[s] that

s. 7 [of the Charter] places a positive obligation on the state to ensure that each

person enjoys life, liberty or security of the person”. He did not consider it arguable

that the delay in continuing benefits which the class members had received before

they were 18 and for which they were eligible constituted a deprivation, as “a long

line of authorities … establish that the government is under no obligation to ensure

that a claimant receives or continues to receive the same level of benefits or

support before or after a certain age or following a policy decision to reduce or

even eliminate that benefit”. He considered the motion judge to have erred in

relying on delay − that is inaction − by the government in providing benefits as

arguably amounting to a deprivation.

[30]   Although Edwards R.S.J. would have allowed the negligence claim to

continue, the majority of the Divisional Court held that the motion judge erred in

finding the appellant had alleged a cause of action in negligence that should have

been certified. It held that Ontario enjoyed common law immunity against the

negligence claim, and that Ontario owed no duty of care to the appellant.

[31]   The majority distinguished two kinds of benefit programs offered by Ontario

to persons with disabilities: “entitlement programs” and “eligibility programs”.
                                             Page: 15


[32]    In the majority’s view, the Ontario Disability Support Program (the “ODSP”)

is an example of an entitlement program because “[w]here an ODSP applicant

meets the criteria, she is entitled to receive prescribed ODSP benefits”. This was

to be contrasted with an eligibility program “under which, if an applicant meets the

test established to be eligible for benefits, she is placed on ‘waitlists’ or ‘service

registries’ for benefits or services. The applicant is not ‘entitled’ to these benefits

or services; she is ‘eligible’ for them. Available benefits or services are insufficient

to meet the needs of all persons eligible to receive them. Ontario allocates the

available benefits or services among eligible persons through a process of triage

and ‘waitlists’ it has designed to implement these Eligibility Programs’”.

[33]    The majority further stated that “[i]t is not alleged, in this case, that the

[appellant] is ‘entitled’ to benefits for which she is merely ‘eligible’. It is not alleged,

in this case, that the [appellant] is not receiving benefits to which she is ‘entitled’”.

[34]    The majority reasoned that Crown immunity applies to the negligence claim

in this case because what was complained about constituted a core policy decision

at common law.5 The choice to provide an eligibility program rather than an

entitlement program is a core policy choice, and it “is implicit that there may be,

and likely will be, persons eligible for benefits who wait for those benefits, or who




5 The majority did not find it necessary to determine whether there was immunity under the CLPA or

whether it applied retrospectively.
                                      Page: 16


do not receive them at all.” The majority further noted that administering a system

to allocate scarce resources between individuals with developmental disabilities

“is, at its core, public administration of a benefits program”.

[35]   In the majority’s view, the same considerations led to the conclusion that

there was no private law duty owed by Ontario to the appellant: “[t]he government

owes no private law duty of competent public administration to individual benefits

claimants”. The majority also considered this conclusion to be compelled by the

decisions in Wynberg and Wareham. They did not consider the appellant’s case

for proximity to be assisted by her receipt of benefits before she was 18, because

“[e]ntitlement and eligibility under programs for Children do not establish

entitlement or eligibility for programs for Adults … to import continuing duties based

on past receipt of benefits as a Child would impugn the government’s authority to

draw a line between programs aimed at Children and programs aimed at Adults”.

The majority also rejected the motion judge’s reasoning that representations “must

have been made” to the class members as they transitioned from child to adult

services. In their view, the evidence of an ongoing relationship between one of the

plaintiffs in Wynberg and Ontario “was much better established” than it was in this

case, yet the negligence claim in Wynberg did not succeed.

[36]   The Divisional Court did not comment on the motion judge’s assessment of

the other certification criteria.
                                       Page: 17


ISSUES

[37]     This appeal raises two primary issues:

      a) Did the Divisional Court err in concluding the appellant’s negligence claim

         did not disclose a reasonable cause of action?

      b) Did the Divisional Court err in concluding the appellant’s s. 7 Charter claim

         did not disclose a reasonable cause of action?

ANALYSIS

(1)      The Cause of Action Test and the Standard of Review

[38]     The test for whether a pleading in a proposed class action meets the cause

of action requirement in s. 5(1)(a) of the CPA, and the test for whether a pleading

should be struck under r. 21.01(1)(b) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990,

Reg. 194, for failing to disclose a reasonable cause of action, is the same: Atlantic

Lottery Corp. Inc. v. Babstock, 2020 SCC 19, [2020] 2 S.C.R. 420, at para. 14. The

facts asserted in the statement of claim are taken to be true unless patently

incapable of proof: R. v. Imperial Tobacco Canada Ltd., 2011 SCC 42, [2011]

3 S.C.R. 45, at para. 22. The statement of claim is to be read generously:

Operation Dismantle v. The Queen, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 441, at p. 451. The question

to be answered “is whether it is plain and obvious, assuming the facts pleaded to

be true, that each of the plaintiffs’ pleaded claims disclose no reasonable cause of

action”: Babstock, at para. 14.
                                    Page: 18


[39]   The standard of review on appeal from such a determination is correctness:

Darmar Farms Inc. v. Syngenta Canada Inc., 2019 ONCA 789, 148 O.R. (3d) 115,

at para. 30, leave to appeal refused, [2019] S.C.C.A. No. 409.

(2)    The Negligence Claim

i.     Position of the Parties

[40]   The appellant’s primary submission is that the majority of the Divisional

Court erred in concluding that Ontario is immune from the negligence claim

because it impugned a core policy decision. This error stemmed from a

mischaracterization of the claim. Properly characterized, the appellant argues that

the negligence claim complains about the implementation of a government

program, for which Ontario may be held liable. The appellant further contends that

it is not plain and obvious that the CLPA bars this negligence claim.

[41]   Ontario asserts that the Divisional Court majority correctly concluded that

Ontario is immune from the appellant’s negligence claim. In its view, the substance

of the negligence claim targets the structure of the government’s discretionary

social program for adults with developmental disabilities “as a whole”, and the

allocation of resources to it, which are core policy decisions. Ontario also argues

that s. 11 of the CLPA bars the negligence claim.
                                       Page: 19


ii.    Government Liability for Negligence and Core Policy Immunity

[42]   In Nelson (City) v. Marchi, 2021 SCC 41, 463 D.L.R. (4th) 1, the

Supreme Court clarified how to distinguish “immune policy decisions from

government activities that attract liability for negligence”: at para. 3.

[43]   Every negligence claim must be based on a duty of care owed to the plaintiff

by the defendant. In a case against a government authority, the Anns/Cooper

framework is used to determine whether a duty of care exists, applied in a manner

that has regard to whether the plaintiff’s claim falls within or is analogous to an

established duty of care or is novel because proximity has not been recognized

before. In novel cases, the full two-stage framework is followed. At the prima facie

duty stage, the court asks whether the harm was a reasonably foreseeable

consequence of the defendant’s conduct, and whether there is a relationship of

proximity in which the failure to take reasonable care might foreseeably cause loss

or harm to the plaintiff. Proximity arises in those relationships where the parties

are in such a close and direct relationship that it would be “just and fair having

regard to that relationship to impose a duty of care in law upon the defendant”:

Cooper, at para. 34. At the policy stage, the court asks whether residual policy

concerns outside the parties’ relationship should negate the prima facie duty:

Marchi, at paras. 15-18.
                                      Page: 20


[44]   In the above sense, the “tort law duty of care will apply to a government

agency in the same way that it will apply to an individual”: Just v. British Columbia,

[1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228, at p. 1244. However, the law also recognizes that “certain

policy decisions should be shielded from liability for negligence, as long as they

are not irrational or made in bad faith”: Marchi, at para. 41. If a core policy decision

is involved, immunity exists, and no duty of care will be imposed: Marchi, at

para. 36.

[45]   Core   policy   decisions    must    be    distinguished    from    “operational

implementation”. Operational implementation has been defined as “the practical

implementation of the formulated policies” or “the performance or carrying out of a

policy”: Marchi, at para. 52. Such operational decisions are generally “made on the

basis of administrative direction, expert or professional opinion, technical

standards or general standards of reasonableness”: Brown v. British Columbia

(Minister of Transportation and Highways), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 420, at p. 441.

[46]   In ascertaining whether a decision is one of core policy, the use of the term

“policy” is not determinative. Instead, “the key focus is always on the nature of the

decision”: Marchi, at para. 60. Broadly speaking, it will be a decision “as to a course

or principle of action … based on public policy considerations, such as economic,

social and political factors”: Marchi, at para. 51.
                                      Page: 21


[47]   In Marchi, the Supreme Court identified four factors to ascertain whether a

core policy decision is at issue. The rationale for the immunity – protecting the

legislative and executive branch’s core institutional roles and competencies

necessary to maintain the separation of powers – guides how to assess and weigh

the factors. The court explained the factors, at paras. 62-65, in the following

manner:

             First: the level and responsibilities of the decision-maker.
             With this factor, what is relevant is how closely related
             the decision-maker is to a democratically-accountable
             official who bears responsibility for public policy
             decisions. The higher the level of the decision-maker
             within the executive hierarchy, or the closer the decision-
             maker is to an elected official, the higher the possibility
             that judicial review for negligence will raise separation of
             powers concerns or have a chilling effect on good
             governance. Similarly, the more the job responsibilities of
             the decision-maker include the assessment and
             balancing of public policy considerations, the more likely
             this factor will lean toward core policy immunity.
             Conversely, decisions made by employees who are far-
             removed from democratically accountable officials or
             who are charged with implementation are less likely to be
             core policy and more likely to attract liability under regular
             private law negligence principles.

             Second: the process by which the decision was made.
             The more the process for reaching the government
             decision was deliberative, required debate (possibly in a
             public forum), involved input from different levels of
             authority, and was intended to have broad application
             and be prospective in nature, the more it will engage the
             separation of powers rationale and point to a core policy
             decision. On the other hand, the more a decision can be
             characterized as a reaction of an employee or groups of
             employees to a particular event, reflecting their discretion
                                     Page: 22


             and with no sustained period of deliberation, the more
             likely it will be reviewable for negligence.

             Third: the nature and extent of budgetary considerations.
             A budgetary decision may be core policy depending on
             the type of budgetary decision it is. Government
             decisions “concerning budgetary allotments for
             departments or government agencies will be classified as
             policy decisions” because they are more likely to fall
             within the core competencies of the legislative and
             executive branches. On the other hand, the day-to-day
             budgetary decisions of individual employees will likely not
             raise separation of powers concerns.

             Fourth: the extent to which the decision was based on
             objective criteria. The more a government decision
             weighs competing interests and requires making value
             judgments, the more likely separation of powers will be
             engaged because the court would be substituting its own
             value judgment. Conversely, the more a decision is
             based on “technical standards or general standards of
             reasonableness”, the more likely it can be reviewed for
             negligence. Those decisions might also have analogues
             in the private sphere that courts are already used to
             assessing because they are based on objective criteria.
             [Citations omitted.]

iii.   Discussion

a)     Errors of the Divisional Court

[48]   Against that backdrop, I return to the question of whether the majority of the

Divisional Court erred in its treatment of the appellant’s negligence claim. As I will

explain, the majority fell into error by: (a) mischaracterizing the claim in two ways;

and (b) interpreting Wynberg and Wareham as determinative.
                                     Page: 23


[49]   First, the motion judge and dissenting judge at the Divisional Court correctly

characterized the negligence claim as one alleging the “negligent operation of a

social assistance system within existing resources” (emphasis added). The

pleading specifically alleges that Ontario acted negligently in failing to rationally

allocate “pre-existing” resources to class members on DSO waitlists who are

already “assessed and approved” for Developmental Services, thus denying them

their entitlement to services. Accordingly, the negligence claim does not target the

discretionary social assistance program as a whole. It does not target Ontario’s

allocation of resources nor Ontario’s exercise of discretion over who is approved

for the services at issue.

[50]   In holding that the appellant’s negligence claim impugns a core policy

decision, the majority of the Divisional Court recharacterized the claim. The

majority said, at para. 126 of its initial reasons, that the claim targeted the

“administration of discretionary benefits under Eligibility Programs for Adults who

are ‘eligible’ but not ‘entitled’ to those benefits.” The majority added that the

appellant was not even alleging an entitlement to benefits.

[51]   The appellant’s claim does, however, make an allegation of entitlement. The

claim asserts that “[d]espite being assessed and approved for Developmental

Services, the entitlement to such services is arbitrarily denied by unreasonably

managed waitlists”.
                                       Page: 24


[52]   Respectfully, the majority’s distinction between “entitlement” and “eligibility”

for Developmental Services elides an important point about this claim. The legal

“entitlement” claimed for the class is that Ontario must take reasonable care in

implementing the process to deliver Developmental Services to those it has

assessed and approved to receive them.

[53]   Pursuant to s. 14 of the 2008 Disabilities Act, the class members have been

deemed eligible for Developmental Services by an “application entity”, and such

“entity” has assessed each class member’s needs as required under s. 17(1)(a).

The statute then contemplates, under s. 17(1)(b), that a “funding entity shall

prioritize the provision of services and supports and funding to the applicant in

accordance with sections 18 and 19” (emphasis added). On the appellant’s

argument, the class members have moved beyond “mere eligibility” to a stage

where they have been approved, assessed, and are entitled to be prioritized for

benefits. The class members are therefore differently situated from those who only

meet or potentially meet the criteria for eligibility. While ss. 18 and 19 have still not

come into force, the appellant contends that, in the interim, Ontario must act non-

negligently in how it prioritizes individuals approved to receive benefits it has

placed on the DSO waitlists.

[54]   Second, throughout its reasons, the majority relies on a description of the

program that misses the essential nature of the allegation. These assertions

include that Ontario already assists 47,000 people with developmental disabilities,
                                     Page: 25


that it has a triage system it designed to allocate resources to persons in the

program (although such a triage system is not referred to in the claim), that

available resources are inadequate to meet the needs of all eligible claimants, that

there will be persons who are eligible for benefits who do not receive them, and

that making decisions in this context is a complex task.

[55]   This description shifts the claim to one that challenges decisions concerning

what resources to devote to a triage system addressing a complex problem in

which demand outstrips supply. But those are not the decisions the appellant

impugns. The appellant pleads that Ontario has no consistent and rational scheme

for allocating pre-existing resources, and that the cause of the non-receipt or

delayed receipt of support and services by class members is that very failure. As

the motion judge and dissenting judge at the Divisional Court correctly observed,

the complaint as pleaded is about the negligent administration of DSO waitlists

“within existing resources” and is not about “insufficient funding”.

[56]   Third, the majority of the Divisional Court erred in concluding that Wareham

or Wynberg were indistinguishable.

[57]   In Wareham, this court upheld the motion judge’s decision to strike the class

members’ negligence claim against Ontario, which related to the delay in receiving

ODSP payments. The motion judge had held that it was plain and obvious that no

duty of care was present between Ontario and the class members because of a
                                      Page: 26


lack of proximity, or the claim impugned a core policy decision. Like the dissenting

judge at the Divisional Court, I agree that Wareham is distinguishable because the

class included those who merely applied for ODSP. In addition, the motion judge

in Wareham indicated that the class members’ allegation of reliance was only

based on the existence of the Ontario Disability Support Program Act, 1997,

S.O. 1997, c. 25, Sched. B, and not from representations made by government

officials: (2008), 166 C.R.R. (2d) 162 (Ont. S.C.), at para. 23. In this case, the class

members have all been assessed and approved for Developmental Services and

the pleadings allege interactions with government officials through assessment

and approval from which reliance could arise.

[58]   Moreover, in Wareham, the motion judge concluded that the impugned

conduct involved core policy decisions because it focused on the “design” of the

ODSP and “the resources that are to be allocated to its operation”: at para. 25. In

contrast, the motion judge below correctly noted that the appellant’s claim focuses

on the operational failures in administering the DSO waitlists within existing

resources and does not allege inadequate funding.

[59]   In Wynberg, this court upheld a trial judge’s conclusion that the plaintiffs’

negligence claim related to a core policy decision. At issue was Ontario’s decision

to restrict access to the Intensive Early Intervention Program (the “IEIP”) to autistic

children between two and five years old. At para. 255, this court agreed that: “rather

than being a claim for operational failures in the implementation of a government
                                                Page: 27


program”, the claim related to Ontario’s “decision-making about the scope of IEIP

and the services to be provided within the special education system”. As the motion

judge and dissenting judge at the Divisional Court correctly noted, those facts are

distinct from the case at bar since the class members here do not challenge the

scope of eligibility for Developmental Services, and instead make allegations that

were not made in Wynberg about operational negligence.

b)      Core Policy Analysis

[60]    The deficiencies of performance alleged by the appellant do not have the

hallmarks of a core policy decision identified in Marchi.6 On the proper

characterization of the statement of claim and in light of the facts it alleges, the

motion judge and the dissenting judge in the Divisional Court reached the correct

result about the negligence claim – that it is not plain and obvious that it is one

complaining of core policy decisions attracting immunity.

[61]    Each of the Marchi factors arguably suggest that the nature of the impugned

decisions in the negligence claim are not ones of core policy. With regard to the

first factor, the pleadings impugn the conduct of “directors” in MCSS who oversee

the administration of Developmental Services and DSO employees at regional




6 In oral argument the appellant conceded that one of the negligence allegations – arbitrarily cutting off

existing Developmental Services to individuals when they reach the age of 18, regardless of pre-approval
for such services and their continuing developmental disability, might go beyond operational negligence
and was not being pressed.
                                     Page: 28


DSO offices. These are individuals removed from democratic accountability and

are clearly charged with implementing the support and services offered under the

2008 Disabilities Act. Similarly, the second factor cuts against finding a core policy

decision. By impugning the “ad-hoc” irrational prioritization approach, as well as

bad databases and computer programs, the appellant focuses on matters that can

be characterized as reflecting an absence of any sustained period of deliberation.

The third factor likewise leans towards finding the decisions reviewable for

negligence as the pleadings suggest that the administration of DSO waitlists

“within existing resources” involves day-to-day budgetary decisions. The fourth

factor leans the same way, as the appellant’s claim criticizes prioritization

decisions and practices on the basis that they are not coherent or rational, and

thus can arguably be assessed based on objective criteria.

[62]   When all of these factors are weighed and considered in their totality, it is

not plain and obvious that the negligence claim targets core policy decisions. The

overarching guiding principle for core policy immunity, the separation of powers,

remains respected if this claim proceeds to trial, as it has the potential to be

adjudicated without compromising the institutional roles and competencies of the

three branches of government.
                                       Page: 29


c)     Duty of Care Analysis

[63]   Moreover, in my view, the motion judge was correct in determining that the

alleged facts can support the imposition of a duty of care. Foreseeability of harm

is adequately alleged. So were facts from which a conclusion of proximity could be

reached. As the motion judge noted, the appellant “pleads that every proposed

class member directly interacted with the defendant through the receipt of

developmental services before turning 18 and had further and direct contact after

turning 18 and receiving formal approval for continuing support and services”. This

creates a factual foundation for the motion judge’s comment that Ontario must

have made representations subsequently relied on by the class members. There

is thus the possibility of sufficient proximity being established at trial.

[64]   The majority in the Divisional Court erred in concluding that Wynberg

undermined a possible finding of proximity, asserting that the ongoing relationship

between the plaintiffs and Ontario in that case was “much better established” than

in the case at bar. As described above, Wynberg involved a negligence claim that

impugned a core policy decision. There was also no basis to compare the facts as

alleged in the pleading in this case against the evidentiary record established

through a trial in Wynberg.

[65]   Absent core policy immunity concerns, it is not plain and obvious that the

prima facie duty of care arising from the presence of foreseeability of harm and
                                      Page: 30


proximity would be negated by any other residual policy concerns. As a result, it is

not plain and obvious that the appellant’s negligence claim has no reasonable

prospect of success.

d)     Ontario’s Additional Arguments

[66]   Ontario made two additional submissions about why the appellant’s

negligence claim is doomed to fail. First, the claim impugns actions that are said

to be immune under the CLPA. Second, the claim is deficient because it does not

advance specific allegations of tortious conduct by individual Crown servants, for

whom Ontario would be vicariously liable. Ontario cannot be directly liable for

negligence − it can only be liable for acts of its servants under s. 5(2) of the

Proceedings Against the Crown Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27.

[67]   In my view, Francis v. Ontario, 2021 ONCA 197, 154 O.R. (3d) 498, stands

as an answer to both arguments.

[68]   With respect to the first argument, Ontario points to ss. 11(4)-(5) of the

CLPA. Section 11(4) of the CLPA provides that there is no cause of action against

the Crown “in respect of any negligence … in the making of a decision in good faith

respecting a policy matter”. Section 11(5) includes in the definition of policy matter

“the creation, design, establishment, redesign or modification of a program, project

or other initiative” and “the manner in which a program, project or other initiative is

carried out”.
                                       Page: 31


[69]   The courts below did not decide whether the CLPA applied to this action

which was commenced before the CLPA was enacted. Ontario argues in this court

that the CLPA applies. Even if Ontario is right on that point, which I need not

decide, it does not change the analysis since this court has held that the

CLPA merely codifies existing law.

[70]   In Francis, at para. 127, this court held that the CLPA did not give the

government broader immunity to that which it enjoyed for core policy decisions at

common law. As such, it did not immunize the government for operational matters

such as the implementation of a core policy. In light of Francis, it is not plain and

obvious that statutory immunity would apply under the CLPA.

[71]   With respect to the second argument, this court in Francis stated, at

paras. 144-146:

             On a fair reading of the amended statement of claim, it is
             clear that the allegations being made against Ontario
             arise from its vicarious liability for the negligent acts of its
             servants … It is also clear from the amended statement
             of claim that the negligent acts are those of servants of
             Ontario. It is axiomatic to point out that Ontario can only
             operate through the actions of individuals.

             There is no absolute requirement that the individual
             servants of the Crown, who undertake the negligent acts,
             must be named in the proceeding. Section 5(2) of the
             PACA simply says that no proceeding can be brought
             against the Crown "unless a proceeding in tort in respect
             of such act or omission may be brought against that
             servant or agent" (emphasis added). The section does
                                     Page: 32


             not require that the proceeding must be brought against
             that servant or agent.

             We accept that best practices in pleadings might suggest
             that the negligent individual, from whom vicarious liability
             arises, be named as a party, at least in a case where only
             one event or individual is involved. However, this is a
             class proceeding in which collective claims are made …
             it is impractical to expect a representative plaintiff … to
             name all of the individuals involved in the collectively
             negligent acts. [Emphasis in original.]

[72]   In my view, these quoted passages are a complete answer to Ontario’s

second argument.

(3)    Section 7 Charter Claim

i.     Position of the Parties

[73]   The appellant argues that the Divisional Court erred in finding it was plain

and obvious that her s. 7 Charter claim had no reasonable chance of success. The

appellant agrees that to establish a s. 7 violation there must be: state conduct, a

deprivation of a s. 7 right, and the deprivation must not be in accordance with the

principles of fundamental justice. But the appellant submits that the Divisional

Court incorrectly interpreted the claim as asserting that the s. 7 breach consisted

of Ontario not fulfilling a positive obligation to provide the class members economic

and human needs. The appellant argues that the claim does not simply assert a

deprivation of the class members’ s. 7 rights flowing from Ontario’s failure to

provide Developmental Services or from the very existence of a waitlist. The claim
                                       Page: 33


also alleges a deprivation of the class members’ right to security of the person

based on the manner in which Ontario has managed DSO waitlists for

Developmental Services for persons it has assessed and approved to receive

services. This state conduct allegedly interferes with the right to security of the

person by undermining the physical and psychological integrity of class members.

[74]   Ontario contends that the Divisional Court correctly struck the s. 7 claim. In

its view, the Divisional Court was bound by previous s. 7 jurisprudence where

claims were rejected on the basis that they sought to impose a positive obligation

on the state to provide financial benefits − there is no obligation on the government

to do so even in the case of benefits that accord with or enhance Charter values.

The failure to provide benefits, or the existence of a waitlist for those benefits,

cannot successfully ground a s. 7 claim. Ontario also argues that the appellant

does not particularize how the deprivation fails to accord with a principle of

fundamental justice, which is fatal to the viability of the s. 7 claim.

ii.    The Law

[75]   To demonstrate a violation of s. 7 of the Charter, a claimant must first

demonstrate that the impugned state action interferes with or deprives them of

their life, liberty, or security of the person. Once a s. 7 right has been engaged,

they must show that the deprivation is not in accordance with the principles of

fundamental justice: Carter v. Canada (Attorney General), 2015 SCC 5, [2015]
                                      Page: 34


1 S.C.R. 331, at para. 55. The pleadings must allege both constituent elements to

disclose a viable s. 7 claim: Bowman v. Ontario, 2022 ONCA 477, 162 O.R.

(3d) 561, at para. 97.

[76]   In Gosselin v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2002 SCC 84, [2002]

4 S.C.R. 429, at para. 81, the majority highlighted that s. 7 is focussed on a right

“not to be deprived” and that nothing in the jurisprudence up to that time imposed

a positive obligation on the state to ensure that each person enjoys life, liberty, or

security of the person. However, the majority expressly left open the possibility that

a positive obligation under s. 7 to sustain life, liberty or security of the person may

be made out in special circumstances: at para. 83.

[77]   In light of Gosselin, this court has consistently held that, to make out a

deprivation of a s. 7 right, claimants cannot point to the government’s failure to

provide a financial benefit, even if such a benefit may be necessary to sustain life,

liberty, or security of the person: see Wynberg, at paras. 218-220; Flora v. Ontario

(Health Insurance Plan, General Manager), 2008 ONCA 538, 91 O.R. (3d) 412, at

para. 108. This court has upheld the striking of a s. 7 claim at the pleadings stage

when the claim alleged that the deprivation stemmed from the state’s failure to

provide access to publicly-funded autism therapy services for children since

“[g]overnment action in not providing specific programs … cannot be said to

deprive [the claimants] of constitutionally protected rights”: see Sagharian v.
                                     Page: 35


Ontario (Education), 2008 ONCA 411, 172 C.R.R. (2d) 105, at paras. 52-53, leave

to appeal refused, [2008] S.C.C.A. No. 350 (emphasis in original).

[78]   However, this court has also held that claimants may be able to make out a

s. 7 deprivation that stems from delay in receiving essential financial benefits for

which they are statutorily entitled: see Wareham, at paras. 16-17. As Doherty J.A.

wrote, at para. 17, “[t]here is a potential argument to be made that [such] delay …

could engage the right to security of the person where that delay has caused

serious physical or psychological harm”.

iii.   Discussion

[79]   I agree with the appellant that the Divisional Court erred in finding the s. 7

claim was doomed to fail because it is completely foreclosed by existing

jurisprudence.

[80]   The Divisional Court interpreted the claim as imposing a positive

constitutional obligation on Ontario to provide Developmental Services to the class

members.

[81]   But when one reads the pleading generously, the appellant’s s. 7 claim

includes an allegation of deprivation of the security of the person that stems from

the manner in which Ontario administers DSO waitlists for Developmental Services

for persons it has already assessed and approved. In other words, it does not

simply allege that the failure to receive Developmental Services or the existence
                                      Page: 36


of the waitlist deprives class members of a s. 7 right. It alleges that the conduct of

Ontario in assessing, approving, and then placing class members into an

incoherent and irrational waitlist process visits harm to their security of the person.

Read in this light, the complaint is not simply about state inaction or delay – i.e.,

the failure to alleviate the class members’ vulnerabilities that already exist due to

their developmental disabilities. The complaint is about harm to their security of

the person, including their psychological integrity, that is alleged to occur from state

action.

[82]   As such, the claim can be distinguished from the claims in Wynberg, Flora,

and Sagharian. In those cases, the claimants identified their s. 7 deprivation as

originating from legislative limitations on the scope of a benefit or the mere

existence of a waitlist, and thus their claims could be characterized as seeking to

impose a positive obligation on the state.

[83]   Here, the appellant points to state action (the ad hoc, unreasonable

administration of a waitlist of individuals with approval for essential services) that

she alleges causes a form of psychological harm sufficiently profound to deprive

class members of the right to security of the person. The claim lists “mental

anguish” and the “development of new mental, psychological or psychiatric

disorders” as some of the harms stemming from the impugned state conduct. The

appellant argues that this psychological harm surpasses the “ordinary stress and

anxiety” that the Supreme Court has held to be insufficient to constitute a
                                      Page: 37


deprivation of the security of the person: New Brunswick (Minister of Health and

Community Services) v. G. (J.), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 46, at para. 60.

[84]   As the motion judge noted, it is true that the pleading also asserts that state

inaction and delay in providing Developmental Services itself constitutes a

deprivation of the security of the person because the benefits are essential to the

class members. To the extent the pleading does so, it sails close to asserting a

positive constitutional obligation in favour of these class members. But given that

the claim read generously goes beyond this, the question is whether it should be

allowed to proceed or considered doomed to fail.

[85]   Although I share the motion judge’s scepticism about the ultimate success

of the s. 7 claim, I agree with the result he reached that the claim should be allowed

to proceed. It is not plain and obvious that, if proven, the psychological harm

allegedly caused by Ontario’s management of DSO waitlists for Developmental

Services to the vulnerable class members could not amount to a deprivation of the

security of the person.

[86]   And even to the extent the claim goes beyond that, it is important to

recognize that claims should be struck with care: Imperial Tobacco, at para. 21.

Novel claims that may incrementally develop the law should be allowed to proceed:

Babstock, at para. 19. This may be particularly true for novel Charter claims that

explore the scope of a right, as such claims often require a trial and an evidentiary
                                      Page: 38


record to fully understand the nature of the impugned state action and the harms

experienced by claimants: Lorne Sossin and Gerard J. Kennedy, “Justiciability,

Access to Justice and the Development of Constitutional Law in Canada”, (2017)

45:4 Fed. L. Rev. 707, at p. 719.

[87]   It is worth repeating that in Gosselin, the majority of the Supreme Court left

open the possibility of a positive obligation under s. 7 to sustain life, liberty, or

security of the person being made out in special circumstances. While this court

has held that this possibility alone is normally an insufficient basis for allowing

novel positive obligation claims under s. 7 to proceed to trial, this claim is arguably

distinct because the class members have already been assessed and approved

for Developmental Services pursuant to the 2008 Disabilities Act. This feature

arguably shares some similarities to the features of the s. 7 claim in Wareham that

was permitted to proceed. As such, the positive obligation dimension of this claim

may likewise warrant further consideration at trial.

[88]   Finally, I reject Ontario’s argument that the pleadings do not sufficiently

identify a principle of fundamental justice with which the appellant’s alleged

deprivation fails to accord. The appellant alleges arbitrariness, with her pleadings

asserting that Ontario has created an “arbitrary” system for administrating the

waitlist for Developmental Services. Taken at its highest, the appellant’s s. 7 claim

argues that the deprivation of the security of the person experienced by class

members has no rational connection to the purpose of the state action.
                                      Page: 39


[89]   Accordingly, I am satisfied that the appellant’s pleadings allege the

constituent elements to make out a viable s. 7 Charter claim and should be allowed

to proceed to trial.

(4)    Remaining Certification Issues

[90]   Ontario argues in the alternative that, if the Divisional Court erred in its

conclusion that the appellant’s negligence or s. 7 Charter claims were doomed to

fail, the setting aside of the certification order should be upheld because the motion

judge erred in his common issues and preferable procedure analysis under

ss. 5(1)(c) and 5(1)(d) of the CPA.

[91]   Substantial deference is owed to a motion judge’s certification decision and

appellate intervention is only warranted if there is a palpable and overriding error

of fact or an error in principle: Fischer v. IG Investment Management Ltd.,

2012 ONCA 47, 109 O.R. (3d) 498, at para. 40, aff’d on other grounds,

2013 SCC 69, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 949. To certify common issues, there must be

“some basis in fact” supporting the conclusion that the proposed issues are

common to all class members and their resolution will avoid duplication of fact-

finding or legal analysis: Cirillo v. Ontario, 2021 ONCA 353, 486 C.R.R. (2d) 25, at

para. 57, leave to appeal refused, [2021] S.C.C.A. No. 296.

[92]   I am satisfied the motion judge did not err, as asserted by Ontario, in

concluding there was a factual basis to certify the common issues of (a) whether
                                      Page: 40


Ontario owed and breached a duty of care to the class, and (b) whether

Ontario breached the class members’ s. 7 right. On the first common issue, I see

no error in the motion judge’s conclusion that the question can be determined on

a class-wide basis as the available evidence suggests that Ontario has a “singular

approach” to administrating DSO waitlists. Similarly, on the second common issue,

I see no error in the motion judge’s determination that the record suggests that

Ontario subjects the class to a single common course of conduct that may

constitute a s. 7 Charter breach.

[93]   Finally, I am satisfied the motion judge did not err in concluding that a class

action would be a preferable procedure. The motion judge reasonably exercised

his discretion and determined that the resolution of the common issues would

promote the objective of access to justice and, even if a substantial number of

individual assessments remain, would meaningfully advance the litigation for class

members.

DISPOSITION

[94]   For these reasons, I would allow the appeal, set aside the order of the

Divisional Court, and restore the motion judge’s order.

[95]   Pursuant to the agreement of the parties, costs of the appeal and the motion

for leave to appeal to this court are awarded to the appellant in the total amount of

$40,000. The costs of the certification motion, the motion for leave to appeal to the
                                     Page: 41


Divisional Court, and the Divisional Court appeal itself are awarded to the appellant

in the total amount of $170,000. Both amounts are inclusive of disbursements and

applicable taxes.

Released: May 4, 2023 “D.D.”
                                                                    “B. Zarnett J.A.”
                                                             “I agree. Doherty J.A.”
                                                              “I agree. Coroza J.A.”
