                                           CITATION: Kovach v. Linn, 2010 ONCA 126
                                                                    DATE: 20100218
                                                                  DOCKET: C50398

                      COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

                          Goudge, MacPherson and Blair JJ.A.

BETWEEN:

Andrew Kovach and Sarah Kovach, minors by their Litigation Guardian, Wayne Kovach
                         and Wayne Kovach, personally

                                                                                 Plaintiffs
                                                                            (Respondents)
                                           and

               Pauline M. Kovach, Mackenzie E. Linn and Barry H. Linn

                                                                               Defendants
                                                                              (Appellants)

Alan L. Rachlin, for the appellants

Kirk F. Stevens, for the respondents

Heard: November 9, 2009

On appeal from the Order of Justices James D. Carnwath, Katherine E. Swinton and
Denise E. Bellamy of the Divisional Court dated January 15, 2009, with reasons reported
at (2009), 95 O.R. (3d) 34.

R.A. Blair J.A.:

Introduction

[1]    Does the Superior Court of Justice have jurisdiction to bifurcate the trial of

liability and damages issues where there is a valid jury notice in place and the parties do

not consent? That is the fundamental question raised on this appeal.
                                          Page: 2


[2]    For quite some time now, it has been accepted that the answer in Ontario was

“no.” We are now asked to reconsider, or to re-affirm, that understanding, at least for the

period prior to January 1, 2010 – the effective date of new rule 6.1.01, which states:

              With the consent of the parties, the court may order a separate
              hearing on one or more issues in a proceeding, including
              separate hearings on the issues of liability and damages.

Background

       The Accident

[3]    The Kovach plaintiffs and the Linn defendants are parties to an action arising out

of a motor vehicle accident that occurred on Halloween in 1999. The action is scheduled

to be heard by a jury.

[4]    Pauline Kovach was out “trick or treating” that evening with her two children,

Andrew and Sarah, and two of her nephews. She reversed her van out of a private

driveway onto a public road where her van collided with a pickup truck operated by

Mackenzie Linn and owned by Barry Linn.

[5]    Although there were other injuries, Andrew – eight years old at the time – suffered

a serious brain injury and pelvic fractures in the crash.       The parties agree that his

impairments are “catastrophic”.

[6]    As it happens, Aviva Canada Inc. insured both the Kovach and Linn vehicles

under separate and unrelated policies. Each policy has third party liability limits of $1

million. It is quite likely that Andrew’s damages, if the plaintiffs are successful, will
                                           Page: 3


exceed the limits of both policies. His claim is for $11.5 million. If the Linn defendants

are found to be even 1% liable, he will have access to coverage under both policies.

[7]    Both the Kovach plaintiffs and the Linn defendants have served jury notices. The

Linn defendants seek to have the trial of the liability and damages issues bifurcated,

however. They propose that the trials of these issues be dealt with by different juries.

       The Proceedings

[8]    On November 26, 2007, Master Egan dismissed the Linns’ motion to bifurcate the

action. She held that she was bound by the decisions of the Divisional Court in Duffy v.

Gillespie (1997), 36 O.R. (3d) 443, and Carreiro (Litigation Guardian) v. Flynn (2005),

195 O.A.C. 315, and had no jurisdiction to make such an order absent the consent of the

parties. Those decisions, in turn, relied upon the authority of this Court in Elcano

Acceptance Ltd. v. Richmond, Richmond, Stambler & Mills (1986), 55 O.R. (2d) 56 and

on another decision of the Divisional Court in Shepley v. Libby McNeil & Libby of

Canada Ltd. (1979), 23 O.R. (2d) 354.

[9]    I will return to a discussion of these authorities later in these reasons.

[10]   Master Egan did not consider whether, if there were jurisdiction, bifurcation

would have been appropriate in the circumstances of this case.

[11]   On May 2, 2008, Justice Chapnik set aside the Order of Master Egan. She

concluded that, on a close reading, Shepley did not stand for the proposition that the court

lacks jurisdiction to bifurcate a trial where one party has served a jury notice, absent
                                                 Page: 4


consent, and that the reference to Shepley in Elcano was obiter. Relying on the court’s

inherent jurisdiction to control its own process and the purposive direction in case

management rule 77.02 encouraging expeditious and less costly proceedings, she was

satisfied that the Master had jurisdiction to make such an order.1

[12]    Chapnik J. was also satisfied that bifurcation was appropriate on the facts of this

case because the liability issue was completely distinct from the damages issues, which

were more complex. As well, a finding in the Linns’ favour would render the damages

trial unnecessary. She therefore concluded that the moving parties had met the onus of

establishing a “clear benefit in terms of time and expense”, shifting the onus of showing a

“real prejudice” outweighing the expediency of bifurcation to the Kovachs, which they

had not done: see General Refractories Co. of Canada v. Venturedyne Ltd., 6 C.P.C. (5th)

329 (Ont. S.C.) and Bourne v. Saunby, 23 C.P.C. (3d) 333 (Ont. Ct. J.).

[13]    Lax J. granted leave to appeal and, on January 15, 2009, the Divisional Court

(Carnwath, Swinton and Bellamy JJ.) allowed the appeal, set aside the Order of

Chapnik J. and restored the Order of Master Egan. The Court held that the Master was

correct in concluding that she was bound by the decisions in Duffy and Carreiro and that

there was no good reason to depart from the decision of other panels of the Divisional

Court: the law in Ontario is that a jury trial cannot be bifurcated if one party objects.

The Court also concluded that Chapnik J. had applied an incorrect test in evaluating the


1
  Rule 77.02 was amended on January 1, 2010. References to the rule throughout these reasons refer to the old
rule 77.02 which was in effect during all of the proceedings under appeal.
                                            Page: 5


appropriateness of bifurcation on the facts.      The power to bifurcate is a “narrowly

circumscribed power” to be exercised only in the “clearest cases”. This was not one of

those exceptional cases.

[14]   On April 23, 2009, this Court granted leave to appeal from the decision of the

Divisional Court.

Analysis

       Jurisdiction to Bifurcate an Action Where a Jury Notice Has Been Served

[15]   Prior to January 1, 2010, neither the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43,

nor the Rules of Civil Procedure expressly conferred the power to bifurcate a civil trial.

As Justice Morden noted at p. 59 in Elcano, however, this fact “does not … mean that

[the power to bifurcate] may not be part of the inherent jurisdiction of the court”. Indeed,

as he said, the jurisprudence accepts that the power exists on this basis, to be exercised

with caution, but in the interests of justice. But he added a clarification – the statement

that underlies the debate on this appeal:

              It has been held that the power may not be exercised where
              one of the parties has served a jury notice: Shepley v. Libby
              McNeil & Libby of Canada Ltd; Clifford McKenzie et al.,
              Third Parties (1979), 23 O.R. (2d) 354, 9 C.P.C. 201.

[16]   Rightly or wrongly, jury cases have long been considered to provide an exception

to the court’s power to split a trial based on its inherent jurisdiction. The power was not

to be exercised in such cases. On behalf of the appellants, Mr. Rachlin argues that the

jurisprudence on which this principle is based has been misunderstood and misapplied,
                                            Page: 6


and that it does not support the jury exception proposition. Moreover, he submits, Justice

Morden’s exclusion of jury trials from the reach of inherent jurisdiction in Elcano –

based on Shepley – was obiter dicta, and is therefore not binding.

[17]   I do not accept these submissions.

[18]   First, Justice Morden’s comment in Elcano is not obiter dicta, in my view. An

expert in procedural matters, Justice Morden was not given to discursive comments. It is

true that Elcano was not a jury case.          Having concluded that the court’s inherent

jurisdiction empowered it to bifurcate a trial in appropriate circumstances, however, it

was necessary for him to state the exception in order to make the proposition he was

enunciating accurate. This does not make the caveat he expressed obiter; it was essential

to his reasoning process, and therefore part of the ratio decidendi of the decision.

[19]   Secondly, the Shepley decision does stand for the proposition for which it was

cited. At p. 355, the Divisional Court said:


              Assuming, without deciding, that a Judge sitting in Motions
              Court has the authority under the Rules or the inherent
              jurisdiction of the Court to direct the trial of this issue at this
              stage of the proceedings, in our opinion he does not have
              jurisdiction to sever an issue of fact or mixed fact and law …
              for determination before trial where there is a valid jury
              notice subsisting. The plaintiff, having properly served the
              jury notice, has a right which is conferred by s. 62(1) of the
              Judicature Act, R.S.O. 1970, c. 228 [the old equivalent of
              what is now s. 108(1) of the Courts of Justice Act] to have all
              the issues of fact tried by a jury subject only to the jury notice
              being struck out by a Judge, or subject to the discretion of the
              Judge at trial (s. 62(3)).
                                             Page: 7


[20]      In Shepley, the motion judge relied on the inherent jurisdiction of the court to

sever a limitation issue for determination prior to the pending jury trial. For the reasons

outlined above, the Divisional Court held that he could not. Mr. Rachlin contends that

Shepley does not stand for the proposition that a jury matter may never be severed, but

rather for the proposition that bifurcation is inappropriate where the result will deprive a

party of the right to have all issues raised determined by a jury (the plaintiff in Shepley

had been deprived of his right to have the limitation issue decided by a jury). Here, the

appellants argue, they do not seek to deny the respondents of the right to trial by jury; at

most, the order sought would require separate trials of liability and damages by different

juries.

[21]      Shepley may indeed stand for the proposition that it is inappropriate to split a trial

where a party will be deprived of the right to have factual issues determined by a jury.

However, the ratio of the case is that the court lacks jurisdiction to do so in a jury case.

The plaintiff in Shepley argued in the alternative that, if it had the jurisdiction to do so,

“the Court ought not to have made the order because it thereby deprive[d] the plaintiff of

his right to have that issue tried by a jury...” (emphasis added). Thus, the argument only

arose in that case if the court decided there was jurisdiction to make the bifurcation order

in the first place.

[22]      Shepley is the lynch-pin in the appellants’ analysis because the attempt to

undermine the authority of Elcano – and of Duffy and Carreiro in the Divisional Court,

which are both founded on Elcano and Shepley – depends upon the conclusion that
                                           Page: 8


Shepley has been misunderstood and misapplied. But it has not been misunderstood and

misapplied, in my view.       Given the foregoing analysis, the appellants’ attempts to

distinguish the line of jurisprudence upholding the proposition that jury trials may not be

split, in the absence of consent, fall away.

[23]   There is a further basis upon which the appellants’ position founders.

[24]   It is a well-entrenched principle in Ontario that a litigant has the inherent right to

have the issues of fact or of mixed fact and law decided by a jury (except in cases where

the right has been taken away by statute). This principle is embodied in subsection

108(1) of the Courts of Justice Act, which states:

              In an action in the Superior Court of Justice that is not in the
              Small Claims Court, a party may require that the issues of
              fact be tried or the damages assessed, or both, by a jury,
              unless otherwise provided.



[25]   The language of s. 108(1) provides legislative support for the notion that a party

may require the issues to be tried by a single jury, i.e., “by a jury.” Subsection 108(3)

provides an exception to this principle by stipulating that the court may order issues of

fact to be tried, or damages assessed, or both, by a judge alone. But – contrary to the

appellants’ argument – s. 108(1) leaves no legislative “gap” to be filled by the exercise of

the court’s inherent jurisdiction: see Re Stelco Inc. (2005), 75 O.R. (3d) 5 (C.A.), at para.

35. This conclusion is reinforced by the decision in Shepley where, on the basis of the
                                                        Page: 9


substantially identical predecessor of s. 108(1),2 the Divisional Court held that there is

“[no] jurisdiction to sever an issue of fact, or mixed fact and law … for determination

before trial where there is a valid jury notice subsisting.”

[26]       Moreover, I do not accept the appellants’ submission that the word “a” jury in

s. 108(1) should be interpreted as “any” jury. Had the legislature intended such a marked

departure from the normal and long-standing practice of trials by “a” judge or “a” jury, it

would have said so by using the words “trial by any jury” or, simply, “trial by jury.” It

did not do so.

[27]       To interpret s. 108(1) in a fashion that permits the trial of different issues by

different juries – absent consent – would also be inconsistent with the well-entrenched

principle that once a trier of fact is seized of an action, it remains seized of it until

judgment is pronounced. The following passage from the decision of Martin J.P.C. in

The “Leonor”, [1917] 3 W.W.R. 861, at p. 871 – cited with approval in Re Regina and

Breckner (1983), 6 C.C.C. (3d) 42 (B.C.C.A.), at p. 52 – captures this principle well:

                    Once a Judge is so seized of a cause or motion he is the sole
                    and only tribunal which can exercise jurisdiction over it
                    (unless prohibited by a Higher Court) and from the time he
                    takes his seat upon the bench at the beginning of the hearing
                    till he leaves it after judgment is pronounced, no other Judge
                    of co-ordinate jurisdiction can either by physical force or by
                    writing under his hand usurp his functions or eject him from
                    his seat, or constitute another forum to which the parties may
                    lawfully resort, which is simply usurpation and ejection in
                    another form.


2
    Judicature Act, R.S.O. 1970, c. 228, s. 62(1); Judicature Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 223, s. 60(1).
                                            Page: 10


[28]   Juries are judges of the facts, and the same principle applies once a matter has

been submitted to the jury for determination.

[29]   Mr. Rachlin asks why in principle, if there is inherent jurisdiction to bifurcate in

judge alone cases, or as between a judge and jury, it should be different for jury cases

(acknowledging that there may be differences in the factors to be considered in

determining whether to bifurcate or not in the different types of cases). He submits that

to permit bifurcation of issues into different jury trials – even with different juries – does

not deprive a litigant of the right to have all issues of fact or of mixed fact and law

determined by a jury – the impediment identified in Shepley. Furthermore, it is consistent

with modern principles of case management, as expressed in former rule 77.02, and

various judicial pronouncements about the need for courts to control their own processes

and the need to conserve scarce public resources: see, for example, Ashmore v. Corp. of

Lloyd’s, [1992] 2 All E.R. 486 (H.L.); General Refractories at paras. 12-13; Woodglen &

Co. v. Owens, [1995] O.J. No. 1360, at paras. 10-13.

[30]   There are a number of answers to this hypothetical question. For one, when issues

are separated in a judge alone trial, it is the same judge – absent consent to the contrary –

who deals with all the issues. He or she simply does so at different times. This is

because of the principle of seizure discussed above. For another, s. 108(3) of the Courts

of Justice Act provides specific statutory authority in a jury case for issues to be removed

from the jury to be tried by judge alone. No such authority exists for the splitting of

issues to be tried by two or more juries.
                                         Page: 11


[31]   In addition, neither the provisions of former rule 77.02 nor the Ashmore line of

jurisprudence assists the appellants in these circumstances.

[32]   Rule 77.02 stated:

              The purpose of this Rule is to establish a case management
              system throughout Ontario that reduces unnecessary cost and
              delay in civil litigation, facilitates early and fair settlements
              and brings proceedings expeditiously to a just determination
              while allowing sufficient time for the conduct of the
              proceeding.

[33]   This rule accurately reflects an important philosophy underpinning the

introduction of case management in Ontario: the expeditious, but just and less costly,

determination of case managed civil proceedings. However, bifurcation is broader than

case management, and there is nothing in former Rule 77 – the case management rule –

that touches on the severance of issues in an action for separate trials. Indeed, when the

Rules Committee enacted the new rule governing separate hearings, it placed it in a part

of the rules far removed from case management. Rule 6.1.01 – effective January 1, 2010

– is the first time a rule speaking to bifurcation has been promulgated. It signals that, in

the opinion of the Rules Committee at least, the bifurcation of a trial, jury or non-jury, is

not generally a good idea unless the parties consent. To repeat, rule 6.1.01 states:

              With the consent of the parties, the court may order a separate
              hearing on one or more issues in a proceeding, including
              separate hearings on the issues of liability and damages.

[34]   This new rule may well permit the bifurcation of issues of fact or of mixed fact

and law even where a jury notice has been filed, where the parties consent, thus
                                         Page: 12


surmounting the jurisdictional impediments previously in place. But the new rule does

not apply to the case at bar.

[35]   In Ashmore, Lord Roskill made the following oft-cited remark, at p. 488:

              The Court of Appeal appear to have taken the view that the
              plaintiffs were entitled as of right to have their case tried to
              conclusion in such manner as they thought fit and if necessary
              after all the evidence on both sides had been adduced. With
              great respect, like my noble and learned friend, I emphatically
              disagree. In the Commercial Court and indeed in any trial
              court it is the trial judge who has control of the proceedings.
              It is part of his duty to identify the crucial issues and to see
              they are tried as expeditiously and as inexpensively as
              possible. It is the duty of the advisers of the parties to assist
              the trial judge in carrying out his duty. Litigants are not
              entitled to the uncontrolled use of a trial judge’s time. Other
              litigants await their turn. Litigants are only entitled to so
              much of the trial judge’s time as is necessary for the proper
              determination of the relevant issues.

[36]   Without in any way detracting from the force of Lord Roskill’s reflections,

however, I make the following observations. First, Ashmore was a commercial case and

did not involve the question of severing issues in a proceeding (jury or non-jury).

Secondly, I agree with the statement of E. Macdonald J. in Woodglen, at para. 11,

concerning the Ashmore comment:

              Opposite this objective, I am mindful of the very persuasive
              argument … that this objective should not compromise or
              prejudice either party to the litigation by the making of orders
              such as the one sought today by the plaintiffs. I agree that, as
              a general proposition, convenience, the saving of time and the
              saving of costs for the litigants, as well as for the State, are
              secondary to the overriding concern that no party should be
              prejudiced as the result of an order such as the one sought
              today by the plaintiffs.
                                           Page: 13


[37]   The key is prejudice to the rights of a party in the litigation. In the absence of

statutory or rules-based authority to do so, there are sound reasons in principle for

adopting the view that a court does not have jurisdiction to bifurcate issues in a jury trial

– or, to put it in the words of Justice Morden in Elcano – “that the power may not be

exercised where one of the parties has served a jury notice.”

[38]   First, there is the familiar injunction in s. 138 of the Courts of Justice Act that, as

far as possible, multiplicity of proceedings is to be avoided. Since they do not want to

transgress the right to have one’s issues tried by a jury, the appellants assert that the

issues in a bifurcated jury trial can be tried by two (or more) juries. Mr. Rachlin was not

able to refer us to a single case where that had ever been done, however, and the

implications inherent in such an order are disquieting. Multiple appeals in the same

action, with the delays and substantial costs accompanying them? Multiple juries, with

the possibility of inconsistent findings between them? Questions about two triers of fact

being “seized” of the same action? As a practical matter, the ability of a judge at the

motion stage to determine whether there will be no overlap on the evidence relating to

both liability and damages at trial, is something that is almost impossible to predict

accurately. The safer approach – for which the Rules Committee has now opted – is not

to permit bifurcation in jury cases unless there is consent. Where there is consent, one

party freely gives up its right to have the issues tried by a single jury.
                                           Page: 14


[39]   Related to these concerns is the long-ago expressed judicial admonition of

Meredith C.J. in Waller v. Independent Order of Foresters (1905), 5 O.W.R. 421

(Div. Ct.), at p. 422, that bears repeating:

              Experience has shewn that seldom, if ever, is any advantage
              gained by trying some of the issues before the trial of the
              others is entered upon...

[40]   This statement was cited with approval in Elcano, at p. 59, and more recently, it

has been reiterated at the trial level by Shaughnessy J – a former Regional Senior Justice

familiar with the challenges of allocating judicial resources – in Blanchette v. Jody

Squires, 76 C.C.L.I. (4th) 304 (Ont. S.C.), at paras. 23-24.

[41]   A number of the considerations I have touched on may not go directly to

jurisdiction. They are more clearly tied to the appropriateness of granting a bifurcation

order in particular circumstances – which this Court has said in Elcano, at p. 59, is only

to be done “in the clearest cases.” Nonetheless, they underscore the rationale behind the

interpretation I have given to s. 108(1) above.

[42]   The practice in Ontario has long been understood to preclude the bifurcation of

trials where a jury notice has been served, in the absence of consent. To reverse that

practice, as the appellants seek, would be a major change in the law. In Ontario, it is

primarily the role of the Rules Committee to develop new rules respecting the practice

and procedure in civil matters. In doing so, it takes into account the needs of the system

viewed through the experience of judges and practitioners across the province.         Much

better that a stark change in practice, such as that proposed by the appellants – reversing a
                                          Page: 15


long-standing and fundamental right to trial by a single jury – be left to the legislature or

the Rules Committee – a responsibility that the Rules Committee has now fulfilled.

[43]   I would not give effect to this ground of appeal.

       The Appropriate Test for Bifurcation

[44]   In view of my conclusion that the court did not have jurisdiction to order the

bifurcated trial of issues sought by the appellants in this case, it is unnecessary to

consider whether Chapnik J. erred in applying a “clear benefit of time and expense” test,

as opposed to a “clearest of cases” test, and I decline to do so.

Disposition

[45]   For the foregoing reasons, I would dismiss the appeal.

[46]   The respondent is entitled to its costs, fixed in the amount of $8,000.00, inclusive

of disbursements and GST.

                                                                            “R.A. Blair J.A.”
                                                                  “I agree S.T. Goudge J.A.”
                                                             “I agree J.C. MacPherson J.A.”
RELEASED: February 18, 2010
