                   COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

      CITATION: Davis v. Amazon Canada Fulfillment Services, 2025 ONCA 421
                                                            DATE: 20250610
                                                DOCKET: COA-23-CV-1057

                        Pepall, Paciocco and Sossin JJ.A.

BETWEEN

                                   Denver Davis

                                                                 Plaintiff (Appellant)

                                        and

         Amazon Canada Fulfillment Services, ULC, Amazon.Com, Inc.
                        and Amazon.com.ca, Inc.

                                                        Defendants (Respondents)

Jean-Marc Leclerc and Louis Sokolov, for the appellant

David Di Paolo, Nadia Effendi, Laura M. Wagner, Graham Splawski and
Haddon Murray, for the respondents

Heard: February 12, 2025

On appeal from the orders of Justice Paul M. Perell of the Superior Court of Justice,
dated June 19, 2023, with reasons reported at 2023 ONSC 3665.

Sossin J.A.:

OVERVIEW

[1]   This appeal involves two orders: one staying a proposed class proceeding

against Amazon Canada Fulfillment Services, ULC, Amazon.com, Inc., and

Amazon.com.ca, Inc. (“Amazon”) in favour of arbitration, and the other dismissing
                                     Page: 2


the motion for certification of the class action against Amazon. The class action

claim involved approximately 73,000 class members and sought $200 million in

general damages and $50 million in aggravated, exemplary, and punitive

damages. Mr. Davis, the putative representative plaintiff for the class action,

alleged that Amazon was liable to the class for breach of employment contracts,

including the terms of Ontario’s Employment Standards Act, 2000, S.O. 2000, c. 41

(“ESA”), and its regulations, and equivalent provincial statutes and regulations

across the country; breach of duties of good faith; unjust enrichment; negligence;

and a declaration that any agreement excluding the putative class members from

the employment law statutes is void and unenforceable.

[2]   The motion judge granted the motion to stay for the class members who had

signed arbitration agreements and dismissed the motion to certify the class action

for the class members who had not signed arbitration agreements.

[3]   The appellant raises the issue of how the principles about unconscionability

and public policy from Uber Technologies Inc. v. Heller, 2020 SCC 16, [2020]

2 S.C.R. 118, apply to an arbitration clause, whose alleged defect involves a class

waiver and waiver of collective arbitration. The appeal also raises several

questions related to the certification of a class action, including how the common

employer doctrine applies where multiple employers hire workers whose work

activities are directed and monitored through a mobile phone application of the

alleged common employer.
                                      Page: 3


[4]   For the reasons that follow, I conclude that the motion judge did not commit

a reversible error in his analysis of certification under s. 5 of the Class Proceedings

Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 6 (“CPA”), which denied certification to the only group

within the class whose appeal is before us. In light of this outcome, it is not

necessary to consider whether the motion judge erred in granting a stay under s. 7

of the Arbitration Act, 1991, S.O. 1991, c. 17, and I would expressly refrain from

doing so. I will describe the motion judge’s reasoning in granting the stay, but I

should not be taken as endorsing or disapproving of that reasoning or the

imposition of a stay. The proper application of the doctrine of unconscionability to

contracts of adhesion in the employment context remains for another day.

BACKGROUND

[5]   Amazon is an online retailer. The appellant alleges that the putative class

members, who deliver goods for Amazon, are all its employees, although the way

in which their work relationships are structured falls into various categories.

[6]   The motion judge characterized the class action as proceeding with

two branches, one involving a class of delivery partners (“DPs”), who were

employed directly by Amazon, and one involving a class of driver associates

(“DAs") employed by third-party delivery-service partner companies (“DSPs”). He

explained the distinction between these two groups as follows, at paras. 3-4:

             In the first branch of his action, Mr. Davis sues Amazon
             as an “employer” of approximately 16,000 putative class
                                      Page: 4


             members. These workers have a direct contractual
             worker relationship with Amazon, and they deliver its
             parcels. These putative class members are known as
             Delivery Partners (DPs). Mr. Davis is not and has never
             been a DP. The first branch of the theory of Mr. Davis’s
             proposed class action is that Amazon is an online product
             retailer that has a part-time workforce of approximately
             16,000 DPs with whom Amazon contracts. Mr. Davis’s
             allegation is that these drivers from across the country
             (actually just British Columbia, Alberta, and Ontario) are
             employees who have been misclassified as independent
             contractors, so that Amazon can avoid its statutory and
             common law obligations as an employer.

             In the second branch of his action, Mr. Davis sues
             Amazon as a “common employer” of approximately
             57,000 putative class members. These workers have an
             indirect contractual relationship with Amazon. These
             putative class members are known as Driver Associates
             (DAs), and they are workers for Delivery Service Partners
             (DSPs). The DSPs are logistics companies that are
             contracted to provide delivery services for Amazon.
             There were 126 DSPs. Mr. Davis is a former DA. The
             second branch of the theory of Mr. Davis’s proposed
             class action is that Amazon is an online retailer that has
             outsourced the delivery of its goods to 126 logistics
             companies, the DSPs. Mr. Davis alleges that Amazon did
             this outsourcing to avoid having to comply with Amazon’s
             statutory and common law obligations as a “common
             employer” of these drivers. Mr. Davis submits that as a
             common employer, Amazon is jointly and severally liable
             for the failures of the 126 logistics companies to comply
             with the employment law of British Columbia, Alberta,
             Manitoba, Ontario, Québec, and Nova Scotia, which is
             where the DSPs carry on their businesses.

[7]   DSPs (and the DAs they hire) deliver Amazon packages through either

Amazon’s DSP 1.0 program or its DSP 2.0 program. Depending on which program

the DSP participates in, the DSP is required to include certain terms in its contracts
                                     Page: 5


with DAs. Under the DSP 2.0 program, Amazon uses a standard form contract that

sets out the terms of employment to be followed by DSPs. All DAs who fall under

DSP 2.0 have mutual arbitration agreements in their contracts.

[8]    Under DSP 1.0, DSPs enter into Transportation Agreements (and work

orders) with Amazon, which set out the terms and conditions under which the

DSPs provide services to deliver Amazon packages. The terms and conditions

under DSP 1.0 agreements vary. Some DAs under DSP 1.0 signed mutual

arbitration agreements as part of their contracts, but an estimated 18,000 DAs did

not sign mutual arbitration agreements. Any DAs who signed the April 2021 version

of the mutual arbitration agreement have a waiver of s. 7(6) of the Arbitration Act.

[9]    DPs are recruited by enrolling in Amazon’s Flex Program through the

Amazon Flex App. Potential DPs download the App to their smartphone and apply

to sign up for the Flex Program. When the DPs register, they are required to agree

to the Flex Terms of Service, which include an arbitration agreement.

[10]   Both DPs and DAs use Amazon’s technology, the Flex App, to deliver

goods. The App allows them to sign up for or “accept” delivery blocks. After

accepting a block, the driver would go to Amazon’s warehouse facilities to pick up

the goods and follow a detailed route provided by Amazon to make deliveries to a

predetermined list of purchasers. The Flex App records the deliveries by scans

and photos, and tracks and times the performance of the delivery assignments.
                                            Page: 6


THE SCOPE OF THIS APPEAL IN LIGHT OF S.7(6) OF THE ARBITRATION

ACT

[11]   Section 7(6) of the Arbitration Act states that “[t]here is no appeal from the

court’s decision.” It applies where a decision is made under s. 7: Toronto Standard

Condominium Corp. No. 1628 v. Toronto Standard Condominium Corp. No. 1636,

2020 ONCA 612, 454 D.L.R. (4th) 126, at para. 97.

[12]   In this case, pursuant to s. 7 of the Arbitration Act, Perell J. permanently

stayed the claims of (1) all DPs; (2) all DSP 2.0 DAs; and (3) the claims of DSP

1.0 DAs who signed an arbitration agreement. Some DAs did not sign arbitration

agreements and so their claims were not stayed.

[13]   Those DAs whose claims were not stayed are not caught by s. 7(6) of the

Arbitration Act.1

[14]   DAs who entered into post-April 2021 arbitration agreements have the

benefit of a s. 7(6) waiver, and so there is no appeal bar. The standard agreement

provides:

               This Agreement and any arbitration hereunder shall be
               governed by the law of the Province of Ontario including
               the common law and the Arbitration Act, 1991 S.O. 1991,
               c.17, excluding s. 7(6) thereof, unless the Employee
               resides in Quebec as of the time the Employee enters
               into this Agreement, in which case the applicable


1 The appeal from the certification decision comes to this court because it was transferred from the
Divisional Court: 2023 ONCA 634.
                                                  Page: 7


                 provincial statutes apply, excluding any rule or provision
                 that would preclude an appeal of a judicial decision on a
                 motion to stay arbitration proceedings. [Emphasis
                 added.]

[15]    DPs did not have the benefit of a s. 7(6) waiver, and leave to appeal was

sought from the SCC, but was denied.2 Therefore, there is no appeal from the

motion judge’s imposition of a stay relating to the DP group within the class.

Accordingly, the scope of this appeal relates only to the DA group within the class.

[16]    As for the DA group, they fall into two categories that are relevant: first, the

DAs who had an arbitration agreement and agreed to a waiver of s. 7(6), and

second, the DAs who had no arbitration agreement. The first category of DAs

engages the stay issue, and then, if successful, the certification issue. The second

category of DAs engages only the certification issue. As a result, if the respondents

prevail on the appeal of the certification issue, they will be successful on the whole

appeal.

DECISION BELOW

[17]    The certification motion was heard May 9 to 11, 2023. On June 19, 2023,

the motion judge released his reasons staying the action against Amazon as an




2 In his factum, the appellant argues that this court has jurisdiction in relation to the claims of DPs who are

British Columbia residents, on the basis that there is no s.7(6) equivalent in the British Columbia
Arbitration Act. However, this national class action was commenced in Ontario and s.7(6) of the Ontario
Arbitration Act precludes this court from taking jurisdiction, irrespective of where a particular group of class
members reside.
                                     Page: 8


employer or as a co-employer for the DPs and DAs that have signed arbitration

agreements.

[18]   Notwithstanding the stay, however, the motion judge conducted a

certification analysis, which was relevant both for those DAs who had not signed

arbitration agreements, and could be relevant for other class members, in light of

the contingency that the stay he had imposed could be challenged and set aside.

The motion judge thus proceeded to consider certification as if the stays he had

ordered were not in place.

[19]   On this basis, the motion judge stated that he would have conditionally

certified a class action on behalf of the DPs against Amazon (but not the DA class

members). The conditions were the appointment of an appropriate representative

plaintiff and the amendment of the definition of the class. With respect to the

remaining DP action, the motion judge further stated that he would not have

certified aggregate or punitive damages as a common issue, nor the claims by the

DPs for breach of a duty of good faith, unjust enrichment, or negligence.

(1)    The stay of proceedings under s. 7 of the Arbitration Act

[20]   The motion judge noted that there was no question that the dispute arguably

fell within the scope of the arbitration agreements, and that the “battleground” is

over whether there are grounds pursuant to unconscionability or public policy to

refuse a stay.
                                      Page: 9


[21]   On the unconscionability and public policy grounds, the motion judge

reviewed the history of the Uber litigation, stating that none of the decisions

derogated from the principle in TELUS Communications Inc. v. Wellman,

2019 SCC 19, [2019] 2 S.C.R. 144; and Seidel v. TELUS Communications Inc.,

2011 SCC 15, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 531, that courts must enforce arbitration

agreements absent legislative language to the contrary. He distinguished the

Supreme Court majority’s holding in Uber on unconscionability on the basis that

the arbitration agreements in this case “do not have the features of time, place,

cost, and procedure that were unacceptable in the [Uber] case”. He characterized

the class action waivers included in the arbitration clauses as a “redundancy”

because the clauses precluded drivers from taking their disputes to court, and a

class action is simply another type of court proceeding subject to the arbitration

agreements. The motion judge also rejected the appellant’s expert evidence to the

effect that all arbitration provisions in the employment context are per se

disadvantageous.

[22]   More specifically, in rejecting the public policy ground to refuse a stay, the

motion judge observed that the drivers subject to the arbitration clauses were not

precluded from pursuing statutory remedies in statutory forums pursuant to the

ESA.
                                      Page: 10


[23]   Finally, the motion judge also canvassed the “at will” references in some

arbitration clauses. He held that those arbitral clauses, which included this

language, were errors that should not be given any operative meaning.

(2)    The certification issues

[24]   As mentioned above, while the motion judge found that the class action

should be stayed pursuant to the Arbitration Act, he considered the merits of the

certification motion under s. 5 of the CPA, assuming the stay was not in place.

[25]   The motion judge found that with modifications to the class definition, the

identifiable class criterion had been satisfied.

[26]   However, all causes of action advanced on behalf of the DAs failed because

they depended on a common employer relationship, which could not be satisfied.

He cited O’Reilly v. ClearMRI Solutions Ltd., 2021 ONCA 385, 460 D.L.R. (4th)

487, leave to appeal refused, [2021] S.C.C.A. No. 316, as the leading case on the

common employer doctrine. He noted that there was no corporate law relationship

between Amazon and the 126 logistics companies, and as pleaded they “are not

an integrated or seamless group of companies operating together as one

business.” Further, the contracts between the DSPs and Amazon disavowed

Amazon as the employer. Acknowledging that such written contracts are not

determinative, the motion judge nevertheless stated that it is “plain and obvious”

that there was no reasonable inference of any intention that Amazon was party to
                                    Page: 11


the employment agreements with the 126 DSPs; the DSPs in a non-homogeneous

way were exclusively responsible in the employment relationship with the drivers.

The motion judge emphasized that Amazon and the logistics companies are in

different businesses, so that the drivers “would not naturally see themselves as

being in the retail trade providing goods to consumers”.

[27]   A second reason why the common employer doctrine was not available,

according to the motion judge, was that the 126 logistics companies were not

joined as co-defendants. He concluded that the DSPs were necessary parties

notwithstanding that they are jointly and severally liable; they were alleged to

breach their contracts with the drivers as well as with Amazon; and their payroll

data was part of the proposed aggregate damages calculation. However, this

second reason why the common employer doctrine was not available “would

disappear if Mr. Davis successfully applied to have the DSPs joined as co-

defendants or if Amazon joined the DSPs as third parties.”

[28]   The motion judge confirmed that the action as a whole could not be certified

for the DAs due to his conclusion with respect to the common employer doctrine.

While not relevant for this appeal, the motion judge found that a modified class

action conditionally could have been certified for the DPs who worked directly for

Amazon.
                                    Page: 12


[29]   With respect to other findings which remain relevant for this appeal, the

motion judge also concluded that there was no basis, in fact, that a common issue

about a common employer relationship exists with respect to the DAs. The motion

judge found that the DAs’ direct employers, the DSPs, did not use or manage the

use of the Flex App uniformly; and if the common employer doctrine applies

between Amazon and the 126 DSPs, there would be 126 discreet common-

employer relationships and hence no commonality. In response to the appellant’s

reliance on Fresco v. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, 2012 ONCA 444,

111 O.R. (3d) 501, leave to appeal refused, [2012] S.C.C.A. No. 379; and

Fulawka v. Bank of Nova Scotia, 2012 ONCA 443, 111 O.R. (3d) 346, leave to

appeal refused, [2012] S.C.C.A. No. 326, the motion judge pointed out that there

was no issue in those cases about whether the bank branches were independent

entities controlling their own employees. He asserted that the case at bar involves

“a diverse forest of legal entities” and was more analogous to McCracken v.

Canadian National Railway Co., 2012 ONCA 445, 111 O.R. (3d) 745.

[30]   With respect to aggregate damages, the motion judge concluded that the

prerequisites for an aggregate award have not been satisfied for the DAs because

liability could not be established on a class-wide basis. Further, in his view, the

appellant had not established a viable methodology for quantifying aggregate

damages.
                                      Page: 13


[31]   Finally, the motion judge found that the proposed class action would not

have been the preferable procedure for the DAs.

ISSUES

[32]   The appellant argues that the motion judge erred both in granting a stay and

in his certification analysis.

[33]   With respect to the stay, the appellant argues that precluding any form of

collective action makes the arbitration agreement unconscionable.

[34]   With respect to certification, the appellant first argues that the motion judge

erred in his conclusion that it was “plain and obvious” that the common employer

doctrine could not encompass this case.

[35]   The appellant also argues that the motion judge erred in finding no common

issues, by failing to apply the “some basis in fact standard” and by ignoring the

evidence of common control that Amazon exercised over all class members.

[36]   Finally, the appellant argues that the motion judge erred by failing to find a

common issue with respect to aggregate damages.

[37]   In light of the limited scope of the appeal addressed above, I will address

only the grounds of appeal relevant to certification of the DAs below.
                                      Page: 14


ANALYSIS

(1)    The standard of review

[38]   The motion judge’s findings of fact and mixed fact and law in the certification

analysis are entitled to deference, and are reviewable on a palpable and overriding

error standard: Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, at

paras. 10, 28. In particular, the findings of the motion judge as to whether

a proposed class action satisfies the “some basis in fact” standard under

ss. 5(1)(b)-(e) of the CPA is a contextual exercise entitled to significant deference.

Appellate intervention in the class action context generally is limited to matters of

general principle and legal errors: see Cassano v. The Toronto-Dominion Bank,

2007 ONCA 781, 87 O.R. (3d) 401, at para. 23, leave to appeal refused, [2008]

S.C.C.A. No. 15; and Cloud v. Canada (Attorney General) (2004), 73 O.R. (3d)

401 (C.A.), at para. 39, leave to appeal refused, [2005] S.C.C.A. No. 50.

(2)    The motion judge did not err in his certification analysis

[39]   The motion judge framed his certification analysis in the alternative to his

main finding that the class action should be stayed pursuant to the Arbitration Act.

However, for the group of DAs who did not sign arbitration agreements, the motion

judge’s conclusions on certification constituted a binding, first instance

determination of their certification motion.
                                      Page: 15


[40]   The threshold for certification is not in dispute. Pursuant to s. 5(1) of the

CPA:

             (1) The court shall, subject to subsection (6) and to section 5.1, certify
             a class proceeding on a motion under section 2, 3 or 4 if,

                   (a)  the pleadings or the notice of application discloses a
                   cause of action;

                   (b)  there is an identifiable class of two or more persons that
                   would be represented by the representative plaintiff or
                   defendant;

                   (c) the claims or defences of the class members raise
                   common issues;

                   (d)   a class proceeding would be the preferable procedure for
                   the resolution of the common issues; and

                   (e)    there is a representative plaintiff or defendant who,

                          (i)    would fairly and adequately represent the interests
                          of the class,

                          (ii)  has produced a plan for the proceeding that sets
                          out a workable method of advancing the proceeding on
                          behalf of the class and of notifying class members of the
                          proceeding, and

                          (iii) does not have, on the common issues for the
                          class, an interest in conflict with the interests of other
                          class members.

[41]   The motion judge recognized that the pleadings should be read in a

generous and purposive manner so as to give effect to the goals of the Act,

including promoting access to justice, encouraging behaviour modification and

promoting the efficient use of judicial resources. He also instructed himself properly

on the low evidentiary threshold applicable to the certification analysis and that the
                                                Page: 16


moving party must show “some basis in fact” for the certification requirements

other than establishing a cause of action.

[42]    With respect to establishing a cause of action, the motion judge noted that

for this determination, the “plain and obvious” test for disclosing a cause of action

from Hunt v. Carey Canada Inc., [1990] 2 S.C.R. 959, applies. Under this standard,

a claim will show a reasonable cause of action unless it has a radical defect.

[43]    As the motion judge explained, the appellant’s claim with respect to DAs

was “doomed to failure” on the basis that the appellant could not establish that

Amazon was the common employer for all members of the class action.

[44]    For the reasons set out below, this finding disposes of the entire class action,

and it is not necessary to consider other findings of the motion judge3, which either

relate only to the DPs, or are not necessary to reach in light of the conclusion that

Amazon was not a common employer.

(3) The motion judge did not err in his common employer analysis

[45]    In light of the fact that the appellant brought the class action against Amazon,

and not the 126 DSP logistics companies who employ the DA group within the

class, a key issue in the certification motion was whether Amazon was a “common

employer”, together with the DSPs, who owed duties as an employer to the class.




3 I will also briefly touch upon the motion judge’s finding on preferable procedure.
                                    Page: 17


[46]   The motion judge explained his common employer analysis at paras. 158-

160 of his reasons:

            The heart of the second branch of Mr. Davis’s proposed
            class action is that Amazon is the “common employer” of
            approximately 57,000 DAs that have contracted with 126
            logistics companies that have contracts with the DAs as
            employees, independent contractors, or workers from an
            employment agency (temps). Paragraph 69 of the
            Statement of Claim pleads: “Amazon and Amazon DSPs
            should be treated as one employer for the purposes of
            the ESA and Equivalent Legislation and the Plaintiff and
            Class members’ entitlement to statutory minimum
            payments under it and their entitlements at common law.”
            As pleaded, Amazon and 126 separate logistics
            companies are to be treated as one common employer.

            In its argument about the common issues criterion for
            certification, Amazon submits that there is no basis in fact
            for a commonality that Amazon and 126 logistics
            companies are a common employer; i.e., Mr. Davis’s
            action fails the common issues criterion. As discussed
            later in these Reasons for Decision, I agree with that
            submission. Amazon also argues that the premise of a
            one common employer for the approximately 73,000
            putative class members fails the preferable procedure
            criterion. As discussed later in these Reasons for
            Decision, I agree with that submission.

            Moreover, as I shall now explain, Amazon’s argument
            against a common employer cause of action also
            succeeds under the cause of action criterion. It succeeds
            because accepting the facts as they have been pleaded
            as proven, Mr. Davis’s common employer claim is
            doomed to failure. Reading the Statement of Claim
            generously, it is plain, obvious, and beyond a reasonable
            doubt that the putative Class Members alleged to be
            employed by a logistics company and simultaneously be
            employed by Amazon cannot succeed. Thus, as I shall
                                     Page: 18


             explain below, the beating heart of this branch of
             Mr. Davis’s proposed class action arrives thrice stillborn.

[47]   The key to the motion judge’s conclusion was the rejection of the appellant’s

argument that Amazon was a common employer for the class member drivers.

[48]   Relying on this court’s decision in O'Reilly, the motion judge held that there

were two prongs which the appellant had to establish for Amazon to be a common

employer for the DAs. First, there must be a significant degree of interrelationship

and/or common control between the alleged common employers; and second, the

court must assess whether the employee held a reasonable expectation that each

of the alleged common employers were parties to the employment arrangement

governing the employee at the relevant times.

[49]   The motion judge observed that there were 126 distinct DSPs, none of

whom were part of the class action, but each of whom employed the putative class

members. For some DSPs, Amazon was the only customer for delivery services,

while for others, Amazon was one of many large customers.

[50]   Applying the threshold for a common employer in O’Reilly, the motion judge

concluded that Amazon was not a common employer for class members, at

para. 173:

             In the immediate case, it may be noted that as pleaded
             (and as shown by the evidence on the certification motion
             and the stay motion), Amazon and the 126 autonomous
             DSP logistics companies are not an integrated or
             seamless group of companies operating together as one
                                     Page: 19


             business. The 126 autonomous logistics companies are
             not involved in owning or exercising control over
             Amazon’s online consumer business, and Amazon is
             only involved in the business of the logistics companies
             to the extent that it sets performance standards for the
             delivery of Amazon’s goods to consumers. Either way, it
             cannot be said that Amazon and the 126 autonomous
             logistics companies were carrying on a singular
             enterprise. Amazon and each of the 126 autonomous
             logistics companies were not carrying on business
             together; they were doing their own respective
             businesses. It is true that Amazon’s contracts with the
             DSPs affect how the 126 autonomous logistics
             companies carry out their role as employer, but
             Amazon’s role is different, it is a client of the 126
             autonomous logistics companies that demands a level of
             performance to complete its own business as an online
             retailer.

[51]   The motion judge added that, while not determinative, the employment

contracts between the DSPs and drivers expressly excluded Amazon as the

employer.

[52]   In these circumstances, the motion judge concluded that it was plain and

obvious that the written agreements and the other material facts did not reasonably

permit the inference that there was an intention that Amazon was a party to the

employment agreements between the 126 DSPs and their drivers. Further, he held

that it was plain and obvious that Amazon did not undertake, as a matter of contract

formation, to fulfill any obligation as an employer to the workers of the 126 DSPs.

[53]   The appellant argues that the motion judge erred in this conclusion on the

common employer standard, emphasizing the various ways in which their
                                     Page: 20


pleadings asserted Amazon’s control (and reiterating that these pleadings are to

be taken as true for the purposes of establishing a cause of action pursuant to

certification). According to the appellant, this control was achieved by requiring the

drivers to use the Amazon Flex App (which all Amazon DSPs and Class Members

are required to use in the performance of their job duties).

[54]   Rather than focusing on the pleadings, the appellant contends that the

motion judge erred by instead considering the record of evidence produced by

Amazon with respect to its relationship to the DSPs. As the appellant put it in his

factum, “the motions judge’s reasons built and tore down a strawman of complexity

and diversity involving 126 logistics companies and 57,000 DAs, rather than

considering the case that was actually pleaded.”

[55]   The respondents counter that it was open to the motion judge to consider

the contracts incorporated by reference in the statement of claim – between the

DAs and the DSPs, and between the DSPs and Amazon – in his analysis under

s. 5(1)(a) of the CPA.

[56]   The motion judge also concluded that the claim was not properly constituted

because the appellant chose not to name the DSPs as defendants. He referred to

this fact as a “second corroborating reason” for concluding that the common law

employer doctrine is not available to the appellant. The motion judge characterized
                                        Page: 21


the 126 DSPs as “necessary” parties, whose absence is a separate basis to

dismiss the claim.

[57]   The appellant asserts that no relief was sought against the DSPs, and that

the Rules of Civil Procedure would permit whatever documentary production may

be required from the DSPs as part of the class action against Amazon.

[58]   The respondents highlight that the outcome of any class action would

necessarily affect the rights and liabilities of the DSPs. At a minimum, they argue,

Amazon could only be liable if the DSPs failed to pay all ESA obligations.

[59]   In my view, the motion judge’s conclusion on the common employer doctrine

was rooted in the pleadings and was open to him to reach on the record. His finding

that the pleaded facts could not satisfy the common employer test was a finding of

mixed fact and law, which is entitled to deference on appeal: PMC York Properties

Inc. v. Siudak, 2022 ONCA 635, 473 D.L.R. (4th) 136, at para. 29, leave to appeal

refused, [2022] S.C.C.A. No. 407.

[60]   The central question arising out of the O’Reilly analysis was framed by

Zarnett J.A. as follows, at para. 65:

             Whether the related corporations actually undertook to
             perform those obligations is a question of contractual
             formation – did the parties objectively act in a way that
             shows they intended to be parties to an employment
             contract with each other, on the terms alleged? Of central
             relevance to that question is where effective control over
             the employee resided.
                                      Page: 22


[61]   The appellant contends that while there may have been some variance

among some of the DSPs in terms of size, structure, and even sophistication, the

relationship that Amazon has with DAs, and the level of oversight and control that

it exercises over them (largely through the common Flex App), did not materially

vary. Even assuming these assertions as true, the motion judge found that the

relationship between Amazon and the DSPs – with the former selling goods to its

customers, and the latter delivering those goods to its customers – did not

constitute an “integrated or seamless” group of companies operating together as

one business. “They were not carrying on business together; they were doing their

own respective businesses.” Again, these findings are entitled to deference.

[62]   While the appellant seizes on the motion judge’s reference to “the evidence”

before him in relation to his common employer findings as an indication that he

failed to focus on the pleadings, the entirety of the impugned passage shows

otherwise. The phrase the motion judge used was: “as pleaded (and as shown by

the evidence on the certification motion and the stay motion)”. He had proper

regard to the pleadings.

[63]   While the motion judge could have been more precise in distinguishing the

relevance of the record at the cause of action stage of the analysis (s. 5(1)(a)) and

the common issues stage (s. 5(1)(c)), the motion judge properly instructed himself

at the outset of his cause of action analysis under s. 5(1)(a), at para. 155, that:
                                      Page: 23


             In a proposed class proceeding, in determining whether
             the pleading discloses a cause of action, no evidence is
             admissible, and the material facts pleaded are accepted
             as true, unless patently ridiculous or incapable of proof.
             The pleading is read generously, and it will be
             unsatisfactory only if it is plain, obvious, and beyond a
             reasonable doubt that the plaintiff cannot succeed.

[64]   As a corollary to the motion judge’s conclusion on the common employer

issue, the motion judge also rejected the appellant’s argument that the use of the

Flex App constituted a common issue. The motion judge concluded, at para. 240:

             Indeed, Amazon has established that is no basis in fact
             that the issue cannot be decided uniformly for the
             putative Class members. The basis-in-fact evidence is
             that while 57,000 putative Class members use the Flex
             App, they can and do use it idiosyncratically and they are
             directed to use it idiosyncratically by their particular DSP.
             The basis-in-fact evidence is that some DAs behave
             consistently and compliantly with the directives of the
             Flex App, some DAs behave in ways that depart from the
             directives of the Flex App, or in ways that may or may not
             comply with their direct employer’s contractual
             arrangement with Amazon. The basis-in-fact evidence is
             the DSPs, who are the direct employers of the DAs
             workers: (a) do not use the Flex App uniformly; (b) do not
             manage the use of the Flex App uniformly; (c) do not
             monitor the use of the Flex App uniformly, and (d) do not
             administer the use of the Flex App uniformly. There is no
             commonality.

[65]   The motion judge reiterated that, at para. 243, “The case at bar is one in

which there is no commonality as to whether Amazon is a common employer with

126 logistics companies.”
                                       Page: 24


[66]   Again, I see no error with the motion judge’s analysis or conclusion on this

question, and thus I would reject this ground of appeal.

[67]   I would also add that the motion judge’s analysis on preferable procedure,

the fourth criterion for certification, is unassailable. As he stated, at para. 280:

             The ambitious action on behalf of the DAs is
             unmanageable with or without the 126 logistics
             companies being joined as co-defendants or as third
             parties brought in by Amazon asserting claims for
             contribution and indemnity. What Mr. Davis’s proposed
             common employer cause of action attempts to hide is
             that it is really 126 discrete proposed class actions that
             have been joined together.

[68]   Ultimately, the motion judge considered that whether the DA claims satisfied

the preferable procedure criterion was moot because of the absence of a common

issue. That said, the inability to satisfy this criterion is also fatal to the appellant’s

position.

DISPOSITION

[69]   As a result of the motion judge’s finding that Amazon was not a common

employer for the DA group within the class, and that the shared use of the Flex App

could not constitute a common issue, the certification motion with respect to that

group must fail. So too with the appellant's inability to satisfy the preferable

procedure criterion. The fact that the motion judge stated that he would have

conditionally certified a class action for the DPs is not relevant for this appeal.
                                    Page: 25


[70]   Accordingly, I would dismiss the appeal.

[71]   The respondents are entitled to costs in the agreed upon amount of $50,000,

all inclusive.

Released: June 10, 2025 “S.E.P.”

                                                                     “L. Sossin J.A.”
                                                          “I agree. S.E. Pepall J.A.”
                                                  “I agree. David M. Paciocco J.A.”
