                       COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

 CITATION: Kondaj v. Crossbridge Condominium Services Ltd., 2026 ONCA 636
                                                           DATE: 20260910
                                               DOCKET: COA-25-CV-0972

                       Paciocco, Thorburn and Dawe JJ.A.

BETWEEN
                               Gazmend Kondaj
                                                                      Plaintiff
                                                                 (Respondent)
                                     and

          Crossbridge Condominium Services Ltd. and Duka Property
                              Management Inc.
                                                                 Defendants
                                  (Duka Property Management Inc., Appellant)
                        (Crossbridge Condominium Services Ltd., Respondent)


Alisha Kassam and Greg McGinnis, for the appellant/respondent by way of cross-
appeal Duka Property Management Inc.

Ian D. Hurley, for the respondent/respondent by way of cross-appeal Gazmend
Kondaj

Matthew R. Vella and Caroline DeBruin, for the respondent/appellant by way of
cross-appeal Crossbridge Condominium Services Ltd.

Heard: April 7, 2026

On appeal from the order of Justice Markus Koehnen of the Superior Court of
Justice, dated June 30, 2025, with reasons reported at 2025 ONSC 3905, and from
the costs order, dated October 31, 2025.


Thorburn J.A.
OVERVIEW

[1]   Gazmend      Kondaj      (“Mr.   Kondaj”)   was   employed    by   Crossbridge

Condominium Services Ltd. (“Crossbridge”) as a building manager for the SoHo

Hotel & Residences Shared Facilities (“SoHo”). As is common in the industry,

SoHo later retendered its property management contract. After retendering the

contract, SoHo replaced Crossbridge with Duka Property Management Inc.

(“Duka”).

[2]   Upon taking over management of SoHo, Duka chose not to continue

Mr. Kondaj’s employment. Upon losing the SoHo contract, Crossbridge made the

same choice.

[3]   Duka paid Mr. Kondaj his statutory termination entitlements, enrolled him in

its benefits program, and provided him with a T4 pursuant to ss. 57 and 75 of the

Employment Standards Act, 2000, S.O. 2000, c. 41 (“the Act”).

[4]   However, neither Duka nor Crossbridge paid Mr. Kondaj any common law

notice entitlements. Each of Duka and Crossbridge took the position that the other

was responsible for paying Mr. Kondaj’s common law notice entitlements.

[5]   The question on this appeal is: when a new building services provider

decides not to continue the employment of an old services provider’s employee,

who is responsible for paying the employee’s common law notice entitlements? Is

it the old building services provider or the new one? This involves the interpretation

of ss. 56 and 75 of the Act.
[6]    As noted by the motion judge, it appears that no court has addressed this

question before. The motion judge held that, as the incoming building services

provider, Duka was legally obligated to pay Mr. Kondaj’s common law reasonable

notice entitlements when Duka decided not to continue his employment. As such

he granted summary judgment.

[7]    The appellant Duka claims that the motion judge erred in his interpretation

of ss. 56 and 75 of the Act and misapplied the modern principles of statutory

interpretation. These principles are set out in the seminal decision in Rizzo & Rizzo

Shoes Ltd. (Re), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27, which held at para. 21 that:


             [T]he words of an Act are to be read in their entire context
             and in their grammatical and ordinary sense
             harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of
             the Act, and the intention of Parliament.

[8]    Duka claims that the motion judge placed undue emphasis on one aspect of

inferred legislative intent and failed to give effect to both the scheme of the Act and

the ordinary grammatical meaning of the words in ss. 56 and 75.

[9]    Duka also appeals the substantial indemnity costs award against it.

Crossbridge cross-appeals on the basis that it was not found liable to pay

Mr. Kondaj’s common law entitlements and therefore should have been awarded

its costs of the motion.

[10]   I will briefly summarize the facts that are not in dispute, the relevant statutory

provisions, and then provide my analysis of the motion judge’s reasons and my
conclusion regarding the interpretation of ss. 56 and 75 of the Act. I will finally

address the issues regarding costs.


THE EVIDENCE

[11]   Duka and Crossbridge both provide management services to condominium

corporations across the Greater Toronto Area.

[12]   On or about June 18, 2020, Mr. Kondaj signed a contract of employment

and began providing building management services for Crossbridge. In January of

2023, Crossbridge assigned Mr. Kondaj to the SoHo in Toronto.

[13]   After SoHo retendered the contract to manage the property, SoHo awarded

the property management contract to Duka.

[14]   On November 2, 2023, Duka advised Crossbridge that it would be taking

over property management at the SoHo, effective December 1, 2023. Duka

requested information about the employees working at the SoHo and discovered

that Mr. Kondaj was the only Crossbridge employee at the SoHo site.

[15]   On November 21, 2023, Crossbridge told Mr. Kondaj that Crossbridge’s

contract with SoHo would end on November 30, 2023 and that, on December 1,

Duka would take over management of the SoHo property.

[16]   On November 29, 2023, Mr. Kondaj met with Duka and told them that he

hoped to obtain employment with Duka in a more senior role (and with a salary

increase). Duka told Mr. Kondaj that Duka could not offer him such a role.
[17]   On November 30, Duka told Crossbridge that Duka would not be continuing

Mr. Kondaj’s employment. Also on November 30, Mr. Kondaj emailed Crossbridge

to ask for “an update regarding [his] employment status and next assignment” with

Crossbridge as of December 1, 2023. Crossbridge told Mr. Kondaj they would not

be assigning him to another Crossbridge property. Later that day, Duka formally

advised Mr. Kondaj that Duka would not continue his employment in any capacity.

[18]   On December 1, 2023, Crossbridge provided Mr. Kondaj with his Record of

Employment, confirming that his employment ended on November 30, 2023, due

to “a shortage of work/end of contract or season”. Crossbridge did not provide any

compensation to Mr. Kondaj.

[19]   Pursuant to ss. 75(2) and 57 of the Act, Duka paid Mr. Kondaj $4,967.31,

the three weeks’ termination pay to which he was entitled. On December 21, 2023,

Duka enrolled Mr. Kondaj in Duka’s benefit plan for three weeks as required by the

Act. Duka also issued a T4 Statement of Remuneration to Kondaj, designating

Duka as his employer, and prepared a Record of Employment, indicating dismissal

as the reason for issuance.

[20]   In March 2024, Mr. Kondaj issued a Statement of Claim against both

Crossbridge and Duka, claiming wrongful dismissal. He then brought a summary

judgment motion, seeking damages in lieu of common law reasonable notice.
[21]   On November 26, 2024, Mr. Kondaj issued settlement offers to both Duka

and Crossbridge. Neither offer was conditional on acceptance by the other

defendant. Both Duka and Crossbridge rejected Mr. Kondaj’s settlement offers.


THE MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT

[22]   Mr. Kondaj brought a motion for summary judgment. There was no dispute

that Mr. Kondaj was owed common law entitlements: the only issue was which of

the two building services providers was required to pay them.

[23]   Duka claimed that Crossbridge was liable to pay Mr. Kondaj’s common law

notice entitlements, because s. 75 of the Act only required Duka to pay

Mr. Kondaj’s termination and severance pay. Crossbridge claimed that Duka was

liable to pay Mr. Kondaj’s common law notice entitlements, because read together,

ss. 75 and 56 of the Act attributed liability for both statutory and common law

termination entitlements to Duka.

[24]   The motion judge held that as the new building services provider, Duka was

required to pay Mr. Kondaj’s common law notice entitlements. The motion judge

therefore granted summary judgment against Duka in the amount of $78,925, the

equivalent of 10 months’ common law notice, as well as damages in lieu of lost

benefits. The motion judge also granted Mr. Kondaj partial indemnity costs up to

the time he served his settlement offers and substantial indemnity costs thereafter.

The motion judge declined to award Crossbridge its costs as against Duka.
THE LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS

[25]   Part XV of the Act governs the termination and severance of employment in

Ontario. Section 56, which is part of Part XV, provides that an employee is

terminated if “the employer dismisses the employee or otherwise refuses or is

unable to continue employing him or her” (emphasis added). Part XV of the Act

also includes s. 54, which requires employers to give employees notice before

termination, and s. 61, which governs payments in lieu of notice.

[26]   Part XIX of the Act establishes distinct rules for building services providers

like Duka and Crossbridge. Part XIX includes s. 75 of the Act, which governs

termination when a building services provider is replaced. If a new provider

chooses not to continue the employment of the old provider’s employee, s. 75

deems the new provider to have employed them for the purposes of their

termination and severance pay under Part XV of the Act. Section 75 reads as

follows:


             New provider

             75. (1) This Part applies if a building services provider for a building is
             replaced by a new provider.

             Termination and severance pay

             (2) The new provider shall comply with Part XV (Termination and
             Severance of Employment) with respect to every employee of the
             replaced provider who is engaged in providing services at the
             premises and whom the new provider does not employ as if the new
             provider had terminated and severed the employee's employment.

             Same
              (3) The new provider shall be deemed to have been the employee's
              employer for the purpose of subsection (2). [Emphasis added.]

[27]    Although s. 75(2) refers expressly to statutory “termination and severance

pay”, it makes no reference to the payment of common law entitlements.


ANALYSIS OF THE MOTION JUDGE’S DECISION

[28]    The interpretation of a statute is a question of law: Mazur v. Elias Estate

(2005), 75 O.R. (3d) 299 (C.A.), at para 9. The standard of review on a question

of law is correctness: Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, at

para 8.

[29]    The motion judge noted, and the parties agree that, as set out in Rizzo

Shoes, a court must read the words of a statute in a manner consistent with (i) the

intention of the legislature, (ii) the object and scheme of the Act, and (iii) the

meaning of the words in context and read in their grammatical and ordinary sense.


1.      Whether the motion judge’s interpretation is consistent with the
        intention of the legislature

[30]    The first issue is whether the motion judge’s decision is consistent with the

intention of the legislature.


       a.   The motion judge’s decision

[31]    There is no dispute that in enacting s. 75 of the Act and its forerunners, the

legislature generally intended to promote continuous employment for building
services employees given that contracts for building services providers change

hands frequently.

[32]   The motion judge held that imposing common law notice obligations on the

new provider would be more consistent with the legislative intention for three

reasons.

[33]   First, placing the burden on the former provider “may incentivize the new

provider to terminate existing employees”, contrary to the intention of the

legislature, because as the motion judge noted at para. 34 of these reasons:


             If the new provider takes on existing employees and
             terminates them at some later point, there is no doubt
             that the new provider would be liable for common law
             notice. Subsection 10(2) of the Act requires notice be
             calculated in a way which includes the employee’s
             service with the old provider. If Duka were correct, the
             new provider could avoid that risk by simply paying
             statutory termination and severance, amounts that are
             typically much lower than common law notice, thereby
             avoiding the risk of common law notice if it had to
             terminate those employees at a later point in time.

[34]   Second, he held at para. 35 that:


             [S]uch an arrangement could be exploited to harm
             competitors: a new provider could force the former
             provider to bear the cost of common law notice, even
             when the contract was lost through no fault of the old
             provider. This would undermine employment stability in
             the building services sector, an outcome clearly at odds
             with the legislator’s intention.

[35]   Third, the motion judge held that requiring an employee to seek statutory

termination and severance pay from the new provider and common law notice from
the old provider would create a confusing and complex regime at odds with the

statute’s purpose of protecting those employees.


       b.   Duka’s argument about the intention of the legislature

[36]    The parties disagree as to the effect of the 1995 amendments to the Act,

which instituted s. 75’s immediate predecessor, s. 13.1. Duka submits that these

1995 amendments signaled a change in legislative intent.

[37]    Duka submits that “when the legislature removed the obligation on the new

provider to offer employment to the predecessor’s employees (or risk assuming

liability for all their employment losses), implicitly it also intended that the new

provider should not be liable for these losses – under the Act or otherwise.”

[38]    Duka points to the statements of then-Minister of Labour, Elizabeth Witmer,

that the amendments were intended to “provide greater flexibility to employers”:

Bill 7, An Act to restore balance and stability to labour relations and to promote

economic prosperity and to make consequential changes concerning labour

relations”, 2nd reading, Legislative Assembly of Ontario, Official Report of Debates

(Hansard), 36-1 (October 18 1995) at 16:30. Duka claims that the motion judge’s

decision to attribute common law notice obligations to new building services

providers amounted to “legislating from the bench”, contrary to the purpose of the

1995 amendments.
[39]    Duka also submits that its interpretation is consistent with the intention of

the legislature as there is no question that a departing employee will receive

additional benefits. The only issue is: from whom?


       c.   The motion judge’s conclusion is consistent with the intention of
            the legislature

[40]    As noted above, the parties agree that Part XIX of the Act is employee

protection legislation. However, the motion judge correctly held that Duka’s

interpretation would provide an incentive to new providers to terminate the old

provider’s employees. Termination of the old provider’s employees would minimize

the new provider’s costs as the new provider would not have to pay common law

entitlements. At the same time, it would maximize the costs of the old provider as

they would have to pay the common law entitlements.

[41]    Duka’s interpretation would also, through immediate termination, allow new

providers to avoid the risk of ever paying significant common law entitlements to

employees largely unknown to them. Incentivizing employee termination in this

manner would be contrary to legislative intent.

[42]    In addition, assigning common law notice liability to the new provider does

not defeat the legislature’s intention in the 1995 amendments to offer employers

more flexibility.

[43]    A brief review of the legislative history is instructive. In 1992, the Ontario

Legislature amended the Act to require successive building services providers to
offer employment to past employees who provided services on-site. If the provider

did not, they were required both to comply with Part XIV of the Act (now Part XV)

and to pay the employee’s wages and benefits lost as a result of their not receiving

the required offer (as determined by an employment standards officer): Labour

Relations and Employment Statute Law Amendment Act, 1992, SO 1992, c 21,

ss. 58-59.

[44]   The pertinent 1995 amendments (s. 13.1, largely carried forward into the

modern s. 75) were twofold. First, the new provider is no longer required to offer

to continue the employment of an old provider’s employee. Second, if they elect

not to, they are no longer obligated to pay the employee’s resulting lost wages and

benefits at the discretion of an employment standards officer: Labour Relations

and Employment Statute Law Amendment Act, 1995, SO 1995, c 1, ss. 71-73.

These amendments therefore give building services providers more flexibility.

[45]   This flexibility exists regardless of who must pay common law reasonable

notice entitlements. Making the new provider liable for common law notice

entitlements if they do not hire the employee simply adds a variable to the

employer’s re-hiring decision, albeit one that weighs in favour of rehiring the

employee (by deferring payment of common law notice obligations until a possible

later termination). It would not, however, require new providers to offer to continue

past employees’ employment, nor would it make them responsible for lost wages

and benefits if they do not extend an offer.
[46]    Contrary to Duka’s submission, the intention of the legislature in enacting

these provisions was not to decide who is responsible for paying common law

entitlements but, rather, to create limited flexibility within a system that minimizes

the chances of vulnerable employees’ termination.

[47]    For these reasons, I see no error in the motion judge’s analysis or conclusion

that holding Duka responsible for the payment of common law entitlements is

consistent with the intention of the legislature.


2.      Whether the motion judge’s order is consistent with the scheme of the
        Act

[48]    The second issue is whether the motion judge’s decision to impose liability

for common law notice on the new building services provider is consistent with the

scheme of the Act.


       a.     The motion judge’s decision

[49]    The motion judge held that assigning liability to the new provider is

consistent with the scheme of the Act because:

        (a)    Employees’ statutory and common law entitlements are intertwined;

               they are not two independent regimes. The Act simply provides a floor

               from which common law protections operate. To suggest otherwise

               would contravene Elsegood v. Cambridge Spring Service 2001 Ltd.,

               2011 ONCA 831, 109 O.R. 3d 143, and Machtinger v. HOJ Industries

               Ltd., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 986; and
        (b)     Under s. 77 of the Act, a party seeking to become a building services

                provider may obtain information about the terms and conditions of

                employment contracts from the existing provider before bidding on the

                project. This enables new providers to assess the common law notice

                they might be responsible for with respect to existing employees.


       b.     Duka’s arguments about the scheme of the Act

[50]    Duka claims that the motion judge’s decision that Duka is responsible for

additional common law payments is contrary to the legislative scheme for three

reasons.

[51]    First, Duka claims that the impact of the Act’s statutory protections on the

common law is limited. Relying on s. 8 of the Act, which provides that “no civil

remedy of an employee against his or her employer is affected by this Act”,1 Duka

argues that while the Act sets a floor of statutory and contractual rights, it does not

affect common law obligations absent specific language doing so (as in s.

141(1)(14), which modifies the doctrine of frustration).

[52]    Second, Duka claims that the party responsible for paying common law

benefits should be the party that entered into the contract with the employee.

Absent a clear provision to the contrary, the legislature is presumed not to have


1 “Common law” is used only in s. 141 of the Act and “wrongful dismissal” is used only in ss. 97 and 98,

which provide that an employee cannot pursue both a complaint under the Act and a claim for wrongful
dismissal in relation to “the same termination or severance of employment”. Indeed, since this decision
clarifies that there is only one termination for the purposes of both the Act and the common law when a
building services provider is replaced, in the future, ss. 97 and 98 will require employees in Mr. Kondaj’s
situation to choose between making a wrongful dismissal claim and a complaint under the Act.
intended to alter the rules of common law: Parry Sound (District) Welfare

Administration Board v. O.P.S.E.U., Local 324, 2003 SCC 42, [2003] S.C.R. 157

at para. 39. Duka claims that assigning it responsibility for common law notice

would unduly override common law rules of privity of contract.

[53]    Third, Duka claims that s. 77 of the Act gives a new provider insufficient

information to determine its common law obligations.


       c.   The motion judge’s interpretation is consistent with the scheme of
            the Act

[54]    I agree with the motion judge that the common law does not operate

independently of the Act.

[55]    First, employees’ statutory and common law entitlements are intertwined:

Elsegood, at para. 5. Statutory and common law entitlements both arise from the

same act of termination (or, in this case, Duka’s refusal to continue Mr. Kondaj’s

employment) and address the obligations that arise from it. Common law

obligations can be shaped by statutory provisions even absent explicit language

tying the two together: Elsegood at paras. 6-12.

[56]    Where the common law continues to apply, it provides entitlements in

addition to statutory notice or pay in lieu entitlements: Elsegood at para. 11,
Machtinger at pp. 999-1000.2 As such, the employer may have to pay more than

the minimum payments for employees provided for in the Act, depending on the

common law notice requirements for the particular employee.

[57]    Second, holding Duka responsible for paying common law benefits would

not modify common law concepts of privity of contract beyond what is already

contemplated by the Act.

[58]    Section 75(3) of the Act deems Duka to have been Mr. Kondaj’s employer

from the commencement of his employment for the purposes of termination. Even

if, as Duka submits, s. 5(2) of the Act requires a statute or contract to import a

common law benefit, I am satisfied that s. 75(3) deems a contract to exist to ensure

that vulnerable employees are protected.

[59]    Moreover, s. 10(2) of the Act provides that:


                The employment of the employee shall be deemed not to have been
                terminated or severed for the purposes of this Act and his or her
                employment with the replaced provider shall be deemed to have been
                employment with the new provider for the purpose of any subsequent
                calculation of the employee’s length or period of employment.
                [Emphasis added.]

[60]    Interpreting s. 75 of the Act to hold a successor provider responsible for

common law notice entitlements harmonizes the consequences under the Act




2
 For example, s. 57 provides that notice of termination shall be provided “at least” for minimum periods set
out in the Act, depending on the length of service. This means that an employee whose employment has
been terminated, may be entitled to common law or contractual notice in addition to statutory benefits.
when an employee is both hired (under s. 10) and not hired (under s. 75) by a

successor provider.

[61]   Third, s. 77(1) of the Act provides sufficient information to enable potential

new providers to assess their common law obligations. It provides that:


             Where a person is seeking to become the new provider at a premises,
             the owner or manager of the premises shall upon request give to that
             person the prescribed information about the employees who on the
             date of the request are engaged in providing services at the premises.

[62]   Section 77 enables prospective providers like Duka to obtain employment

details before they take on a building services provider contract so that they can

assess and plan for liability. As noted in Supreme General Services v. Klean

U Services Inc., 2015 CanLII 58346 (ON LRB), at para. 19, s. 77 “mandates the

three-way sharing of employee information – name, status, length of service, terms

and conditions of work, etc.”, enabling the new building services provider to “make

a rational business decision” regarding employee retention.

[63]   For these reasons, I see no error in the motion judge’s conclusion that

holding Duka responsible for Mr. Kondaj’s common law entitlements is consistent

with the scheme of the Act.


3.     Whether the motion judge’s decision is consistent with the wording of
       the provision

[64]   The third issue is whether holding Duka liable for the payment of common

law entitlements is consistent with the wording in ss. 56 and 75 of the Act.
       a.      The motion judge’s decision

[65]    The motion judge held that the ordinary meaning of the words in ss. 56 and

75, when read in the context of the Act as a whole, is consistent with holding Duka

liable for the payment of common law entitlements.

[66]        Section 56 of the Act provides that “an employer terminates an employee”

if, among other things, “the employer dismisses the employee or otherwise refuses

or is unable to continue employing him or her”. This court held in Elsegood, at para.

5, that “s. 56(1) of the ESA operates to terminate an employee's employment in

law so that the employee may claim for        common     law   wrongful    dismissal

damages” (emphasis added).

[67]    Section 75(2) requires the new provider to comply with Part XV, which

includes s. 56(1), “as if the new provider had terminated and severed the

employee’s employment”.

[68]    The motion judge therefore found that in this case, as part of Part XV, s. 56

operates to ensure that Mr. Kondaj can obtain common law damages in lieu of

notice from Duka.


       b.      Duka’s arguments about the wording of the Act

[69]    Duka claims that s. 75(3) only deems the new provider to have been the

employee’s employer for the purpose of subsection (2). As such, the deeming

provision only operates for the purpose of statutory termination and severance, not

the payment of common law entitlements.
       c.   The motion judge’s decision is consistent with the wording in the
            Act

[70]    First, while s. 56 of the Act describes the ways in which an employee can be

terminated “for purposes of section 54” of the Act, the definitions of termination in

s. 56 also apply at common law, “because [s. 56] applies generally in all cases to

require the employer to give notice whenever an employee is terminated”:

Elsegood at para 8. Likewise, the statute deeming a new provider to have been

the employee’s employer under s. 75(3) “for the purposes of subsection (2)” does

not preclude a similar deeming for the purposes of the common law.

[71]    Second, by incorporating s. 56, s. 75(2) imposes common law reasonable

notice provisions on new providers. The chain of reasoning is as follows: (i)

Mr. Kondaj’s employment was “terminated” for the purpose of s. 56 when Duka

refused to continue to employ him; (ii) s. 75 deems Duka, as the new provider, to

have been Mr. Kondaj’s employer for the purpose of termination as if Duka had

terminated and severed Mr. Kondaj’s employment; (iii) s. 75 requires the new

provider to comply with s. 56(1); and (iv) as in Elsegood, s. 56(1) allows an

employee who has been terminated to claim common law damages.

[72]    As such, reading the words in ss. 56 and 75 of the Act together, Duka is

responsible for paying Mr. Kondaj’s common law entitlements.

[73]    Nor, as submitted by Duka, is Elsegood distinguishable on the grounds that

in this case there was no employment relationship. Section 75 provides the

necessary employment relationship. By refusing to continue Mr. Kondaj’s
employment, Duka was deemed to have dismissed Mr. Kondaj from employment,

thereby triggering the termination obligations that include common law

entitlements.

[74]   For these reasons, I see no error in the motion judge’s decision that holding

Duka liable for the payment of common law entitlements is consistent with the

wording of the Act.


CONCLUSION ON THE INTERPRETATION OF THE ACT

[75]   For the above reasons, I see no error in the motion judge’s interpretation of

the Act and I would dismiss the appeal.


COSTS

1.     The Positions of the Parties

[76]   Duka also appeals the costs award against it. Duka argues that even if its

appeal on the merits is dismissed, Duka should not have to pay substantial

indemnity costs, because Mr. Kondaj’s settlement offers to Duka and Crossbridge

were not conditional on acceptance by both defendants, and thus did not meet the

requirements of rr. 49.10 and 49.11 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990,

Reg. 194. Duka argues (and Crossbridge agrees) that because of this non-

compliance, only partial indemnity costs should have been awarded.

[77]   Mr. Kondaj, by contrast, argues that the costs award is “sound, reflects a

principled exercise of discretion, and should not be disturbed.”
[78]   Crossbridge also cross-appeals the motion judge’s decision not to order

Duka to pay costs to Crossbridge. Crossbridge claims that it is entitled to payment

of its partial indemnity costs from Duka, because Crossbridge was successful

against Duka with respect to the payment of Mr. Kondaj’s common law

entitlements.


2.     The Test for Appealing a Costs Order

[79]   The court has discretion to determine the costs awarded: s. 131 of the

Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43. The usual rule is to award costs to the

successful party: Northwood Mortgage Ltd. v. Gensol Solutions Inc. (2005), 3

B.L.R. (4th) 322 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 6.

[80]   Leave to appeal costs is granted sparingly and only where there are strong

grounds to conclude that the judge erred in exercising their discretion: Canadian

Tire Corporation, Limited v. Eaton Equipment Ltd., 2024 ONCA 25, 95 C.C.L.T.

(4th) 175, at para. 13. Where an appeal is brought before this court, leave to appeal

shall be sought as of right from the panel of the Court of Appeal hearing the appeal:

s. 133(b) of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43 and r. 61.03.1(17) of

the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194.

[81]   An appellate court will intervene on a costs award only where the judge

made an error in principle or where the award is plainly wrong: Greta Energy v.

Pembina Pipeline Corporation, 2023 ONCA 9, 37 B.L.R. (6th) 41, at para. 4;
Hamilton v. Open Window Bakery Ltd., 2004 SCC 9, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 303, at

para. 27.

[82]   I will address the costs award against Duka, followed by Crossbridge’s claim

that it should have been awarded costs.


3.     The Duka Costs Award

       a.   The test for awarding costs where an offer to settle has been
       served

[83]   Rule 49.10(1) provides that where a plaintiff’s offer to settle is made at least

seven days before the proceeding begins, is not withdrawn, does not expire, and

is not accepted by the defendant, and the judgment awarded is at least as

favourable as the terms of the offer to settle, the plaintiff is entitled to partial

indemnity costs to the date the offer was served and substantial indemnity costs

from that date forward, unless the court orders otherwise.

[84]   However, r. 49.11 provides that in certain circumstances, a plaintiff making

a settlement offer to multiple defendants is not entitled to the benefit of r. 49.10

unless their offer to settle would resolve the claim against all defendants.

[85]   In addition, this court’s decision in Davies v. Clarington, 2009 ONCA 722,

100 O.R. (3d) 66, at para. 28, provides the following limitation on substantial

indemnity costs: “elevated costs are warranted in only two circumstances. The first

involves the operation of an offer to settle under rule 49.10, where substantial
indemnity costs are explicitly authorized. The second is where the losing party has

engaged in behaviour worthy of sanction.”

[86]   Finally, under r. 49.13, the court has the discretion to consider settlement

offers which are not compliant with r. 49.10, although this discretion does not

extend to the awarding of substantial indemnity costs: Davies, at para. 40. Rule

49.13 is not concerned with technical compliance with the requirements of rr. 49.10

or 49.11. It calls on the judge to take a “holistic approach” to costs awards: Konig

v. Hobza, 2015 ONCA 885, 129 O.R. (3d) 57, at paras. 42-43.


       b.    The motion judge’s costs order against Duka

[87]   The motion judge awarded Mr. Kondaj, as the successful party, costs in the

amount of $56,321.46, payable by Duka. These costs were comprised of

$6,874.92 in partial indemnity costs, $49,446.54 in substantial indemnity costs,

and $902.29 in disbursements. The motion judge awarded Mr. Kondaj substantial

indemnity costs pursuant to r. 49 because Crossbridge and Duka each rejected

Mr. Kondaj’s offers to settle the dispute for $27,600, a much smaller amount than

the $78,925 Mr. Kondaj subsequently obtained on summary judgment.

[88]   The motion judge held that, “Although the settlement offers were not

conditional on both defendants accepting the settlement, the favourable cost

consequences of rule 49.10 should, in my view, nevertheless apply in this case.”

He held that Mr. Kondaj was entitled to substantial indemnity costs because it was

“absolutely clear-cut” that Mr. Kondaj was entitled to damages, yet he was “held
hostage” to a dispute between the defendants. Moreover, Mr. Kondaj’s settlement

offers were reasonable and Duka’s costs outline demonstrated that the costs

ultimately awarded were within its reasonable contemplation.

[89]   The motion judge rejected Duka’s argument that no costs should be

awarded against it because the issues on the motion were novel. He held that,

although a novel issue arose between the defendants, for Mr. Kondaj, this was a

“garden-variety” wrongful dismissal action. Mr. Kondaj’s ultimate entitlement to

damages was clear. The novel issue that arose between the defendants did not

justify Mr. Kondaj being deprived of costs which approached the quantum of his

ultimate liability award, especially when a protracted lawsuit should not have been

necessary to collect damages in the first place.

[90]   Crossbridge and Duka each took the position that if any common law notice

was owed, it was owed by the other. The motion judge noted that Duka could have

ensured that Mr. Kondaj was paid what he was owed without incurring any legal

costs to him before determining the allocation of that payment between itself and

Crossbridge.


       c.    The motion judge made no error in principle nor is his decision
       plainly wrong

[91]   Rule 49.11 applies to cases where i) “defendants are alleged to be jointly or

jointly and severally liable to the plaintiff in respect of a claim” and ii) “rights of

contribution or indemnity may exist between the defendants”. Here, no rights of
contribution or indemnity exist between the defendants. Only one of Duka or

Crossbridge could be liable for Mr. Kondaj’s common law entitlements. The

successful party never had any prospect of responsibility, indemnification, or

contribution.

[92]    Since this condition precedent to the application of r. 49.11 is not met, the

condition in r. 49.11(a) – that the offer be made to all defendants and be capable

of settling the claim against all of them – is not triggered.

[93]    Having met the conditions of r. 49.10(1), Mr. Kondaj was entitled to the

favourable cost consequences it prescribes.3 Davies did not bar the award of

substantial indemnity costs in this case.

[94]    As such, the motion judge properly exercised his discretion pursuant to

r. 49.13 in the holistic approach that has been endorsed by this court: Lawson v.

Viersen, 2012 ONCA 25, 108 O.R. (3d) 771, at para. 46, and König, at paras. 41-

43.

[95]    I therefore see no error in principle in the motion judge’s analysis or award,

and, for these reasons, I would dismiss Duka’s costs appeal.



3 I note that r. 49.11 is titled “Cost Consequences if Multiple Defendants” and r. 49.10 refers to an offer

which “is not accepted by the defendant” (singular). However, the Rules are silent regarding offers to
multiple defendants where r. 49.11’s two conditions precedent (joint and several liability, and rights of
contribution or indemnity between defendants) are not triggered. The aims of r. 49 – encouraging
reasonable settlement between parties and efficient resolution of disputes – are better met if those offers
can attract r. 49.10 cost consequences (where they meet its requirements), subject to the judicial discretion
in r. 49.13. Moreover, a plain reading of the text of r. 49.11 is more consistent with r. 49.11 adding additional
conditions for the application of r. 49.10 consequences to certain kinds of multiple-defendant offers, but not
all, rather than setting out a narrow class of multiple-defendant offers where r. 49.10 consequences can
ever apply.
4.     The Crossbridge Cross-Appeal for Costs from Duka

[96]   The motion judge held that Crossbridge was not entitled to costs against

Duka on the grounds that Duka made no crossclaim against Crossbridge.

[97]   Crossbridge claims that Duka’s failure to advance a crossclaim is not

dispositive of costs, relying on Firth v. O’Brien, 2013 CanLII 7009 (Ont. S.C.), at

para. 33. Rather, Crossbridge claims that it was entitled to costs from Duka

because it was a successful party on all three motions advanced in this litigation.

[98]   While Crossbridge acknowledges that it did not request a Sanderson order

by name, it argues that one is nonetheless justified to share costs between the co-

defendants in the circumstances.

[99]   Crossbridge argues that to satisfy the Sanderson threshold requirement, it

was reasonable for Mr. Kondaj to proceed against both Crossbridge and Duka as

no court had previously determined which building services provider was

responsible for an employee’s entitlement to common law reasonable notice.

[100] Further, Crossbridge claims that it is just and fair that Duka pay

Crossbridge’s costs as the successful party because all four Moore factors which

govern judicial discretion in granting Sanderson orders are present in this case: (i)

the defendants tried to blame each other; (ii) the unsuccessful defendant caused

the successful defendant to be added as a party; (iii) the causes of action were not

independent; and (iv) Duka is able to pay Crossbridge’s costs: Moore v. Wienecke,

2008 ONCA 162, 90 O.R. (3d) 463, at paras. 45-50.
[101] Duka claims that Crossbridge’s failure to explicitly request a Sanderson

order should bar its subsequent request for one on appeal. In the alternative, Duka

claims that such an order is not justified because Crossbridge was not a passive

litigant, as Crossbridge (i) advanced a crossclaim against Duka, (ii) adopted an

adversarial position in litigation, and (iii) expanded the issues before the Court.

[102] Duka, by contrast, did not file a crossclaim against Crossbridge and its

participation was limited to defending and seeking the dismissal of the claim

against it. Moreover, Duka argues that Crossbridge’s participation in Mr. Kondaj’s

summary judgment motion would have been required irrespective of Duka’s

conduct in the litigation.

[103] I agree with Crossbridge that Duka’s decision not to file a crossclaim against

Crossbridge is not dispositive: Universal Stainless Steel & Alloys Inc. v. J.P.

Morgan Chase Bank, 2009 ONCA 801, 65 B.L.R. (4th) 163, at para. 67. However,

given the novelty of this issue as between Duka and Crossbridge, Crossbridge’s

failure to request a Sanderson order at first instance, and Crossbridge’s

importance to the underlying litigation irrespective of Duka’s conduct, I see no error

of law or serious injustice in the motion judge’s exercise of discretion not to order

Duka to pay Crossbridge’s costs.
CONCLUSION

[104] For the reasons set out above, I would dismiss Duka’s appeal, Duka’s costs

appeal, and Crossbridge’s cross-appeal on costs. In short, in my view, the motion

judge’s reasons were sound, thoughtful and correct.

[105] Mr. Kondaj is entitled to his partial indemnity costs of this appeal. If the

parties are unable to agree on the amounts, they may provide written submissions

to this court.

Released: September 10, 2026 “D.M.P.”

                                                                   “Thorburn J.A.”
                                                “I agree. David M. Paciocco J.A.”
                                                           “I agree. J. Dawe J.A.”
