                    COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

                                  CITATION: Corrigan v. Ontario, 2023 ONCA 39
                                                              DATE: 20230123
                                                             DOCKET: C70652

                        Doherty, Zarnett and Sossin JJ.A.

BETWEEN

                                Kathleen Corrigan

                                                            Plaintiff (Respondent)

                                       and

                     His Majesty the King in Right of Ontario

                                                            Defendant (Appellant)

Heather Mackay and Heather McIvor, for the appellant

Kathleen Corrigan, acting in person

Heard: in writing

On appeal from the order of Justice Robert L. Maranger of the Superior Court of
Justice, dated March 29, 2022.

                           REASONS FOR DECISION

INTRODUCTION

[1]   The Crown appeals from the dismissal of its motion to have the respondent’s

statement of claim struck out as a nullity due to the failure of the respondent to

comply with provisions of the Crown Liability and Proceedings Act, 2019,

S.O. 2019, c. 7 (“CLPA”). Section 18(1) of the CLPA requires that notice of a claim
                                              Page: 2


be given 60 days before an action claiming damages against the Crown is

commenced. The motion judge found that the respondent had failed to comply with

the CLPA requirements, but he dismissed the motion because the Crown had

delayed in bringing it.1

[2]     The Crown argues that the motion judge’s conclusion is wrong in law. The

respondent supports the result reached by the motion judge and maintains that the

appeal is not properly in this court.

[3]     As we explain below, the motion judge’s order is a final order and the appeal

is properly before this court. As we also explain, the appeal must be allowed.

Section 18(6) of the CLPA provides that an action commenced without complying

with the notice requirements is a nullity “from the time the proceeding is brought”.

There was no legal basis on which the motion judge could refuse to give effect to

that provision.

BACKGROUND

[4]     On May 19, 2020, the respondent commenced an action against the Crown.

The action included a claim for damages.

[5]     The respondent commenced the action without first complying with the

terms of s. 18(1) of the CLPA, which provides that no proceeding that includes a



1 The motion judge also dismissed a motion by the respondent for default judgment. That aspect of the

order is not in issue on this appeal.
                                       Page: 3


claim for damages may be brought against the Crown unless, at least 60 days

before the commencement of the proceeding, the claimant serves a specified form

of notice on the Crown. As noted above, s. 18(6) of the CLPA provides that an

action commenced without complying with the notice requirements is a nullity “from

the time the proceeding is brought”.

[6]   In June and July 2020, Crown counsel wrote to the respondent drawing to

her attention the requirement that notice to the Crown was required before the

issuance of the claim. On July 15, 2020, Crown counsel specifically requested that

the respondent discontinue her action due to non-compliance with the provisions

of the CLPA, pointing out that the action was a nullity because of that non-

compliance. Crown counsel suggested that the respondent could start a new

action 60 days after the discontinuance of the existing one, as the Crown would

treat the service of the claim issued in May 2020 as the prior notice required under

the CLPA. On October 2, 2020, Crown counsel again wrote to the respondent

advising her that the action was a nullity.

[7]   The respondent did not accept Crown counsel’s position or suggestions, or

act on them. She consistently advised that she was requesting that the Crown be

noted in default.

[8]   On August 23, 2021, the respondent wrote to Crown counsel advising that

she had brought a motion for default judgment and had been instructed to serve
                                     Page: 4


the motion on the Crown. Crown counsel advised that a motion to strike the claim

would be brought at the same time as the motion for default judgment. Those were

the motions that came before the motion judge in March 2022.

THE MOTION JUDGE’S DECISION

[9]    The motion judge found that the respondent could not obtain default

judgment for a number of reasons, including because “[s]he failed to comply with

the notice provisions of the CLPA they [sic] are mandatory”. He found that the

Crown at all times demonstrated good faith and had tried to assist the respondent

in “rationalizing an improperly issued statement of claim”. However, he held that

the Crown should have moved as soon as the respondent decided to ignore its

advice concerning complying with the CLPA. He dismissed the Crown’s motion to

strike the claim as a nullity. He also dismissed the respondent’s motion for default

judgment and gave the Crown 20 days to file a defence.

ANALYSIS

(1)    The Appeal is Properly Brought in this Court

[10]   The order under appeal – dismissing the Crown’s request to strike the claim

as a nullity due to the failure to comply with the notice provisions of s. 18 of the

CLPA – is a final order, from which an appeal lies directly to this court under

s. 6(1)(b) of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43.
                                        Page: 5


[11]   An order is final if it determines a substantive right of a defendant: Ball v.

Donais (1993), 13 O.R. (3d) 322 (C.A.); Drywall Acoustic Lathing Insulation Local

675 Pension Fund v. SNC-Lavalin Group Inc., 2020 ONCA 375, at paras. 16-17.

The right to have the action treated as a nullity, rather than having to defend it, is

a substantive right conferred on the Crown by the CLPA.

[12]   The motion judge’s order finally determined that substantive right. The order

rejected the Crown’s position that the action should be struck as a nullity, and, in

giving a fixed period of time for the Crown to deliver a statement of defence,

contemplated the Crown having to defend the action or suffer judgment. Either is

the antithesis of treating the action as a nullity. The order is final, not interlocutory,

for appeal purposes.

(2)    The Motion Judge Erred in not Striking the Action

[13]   Prior to the enactment of the CLPA, s. 7(1) of the Proceedings Against the

Crown Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, provided, in terms that are in all material respects

the same as s. 18(1) of the CLPA, that no action could be brought against the

Crown unless prior notice of 60 days was given. It was consistently held under that

legislation that proper notice was a precondition to a claim in damages against the

Crown, that this requirement could not be abridged, and that an action commenced

without proper prior notice was a nullity: Zeus v. Spick, [2000] O.J. No. 3758 (S.C.),

at para. 5, aff’d [2001] O.J. No. 2848 (C.A.), at para. 3; Beardsley v. Ontario (2001),
                                       Page: 6


57 O.R. (3d) 1 (C.A.), at paras. 10-12; Miguna v. Ontario (Attorney General)

(2005), 262 D.L.R. (4th) 222 (Ont. C.A.), at paras. 7-8. In Noddle v. The Ontario

Ministry of Health, 2019 ONSC 7337, at para. 32, it was also held that the

requirement could not be waived.

[14]   The same approach should be followed under the CLPA. First, the

legislature, in enacting s. 18(1) of the CLPA in terms that mirror s. 7(1) of the former

legislation, should be taken to have intended the same effect. Second, s. 18(6)

removes any doubt about this, as it mandates treating an action commenced

without complying with the required notice as a nullity from the time of its

commencement.

[15]   With respect, the motion judge’s conclusion that the Crown was not entitled

to have the action struck as a nullity, because it did not move as soon as the

respondent indicated she did not intend to comply with s. 18(1) of the CLPA,

rewrites the legislation. It conditions the Crown’s right to have the action treated as

a nullity on the timing of the motion, a condition not found in the text. It introduces

a notion of waiver by delay that is inconsistent with the judicial interpretation of the

prior legislation, which held that its requirements could not be abridged or waived.

And it cannot stand in the face of s. 18(6) – since the action was a nullity from the

time it was commenced, there is no basis on which the Crown’s delay in moving

could affect the action’s status as a nullity.
                                      Page: 7


[16]   The respondent argues that the motion judge was right to dismiss the

Crown’s motion because she had noted the Crown in default, and r. 19.02(1)(b) of

the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, prevents a defendant who

has been so noted from bringing a motion without leave. We reject this argument.

First, it was not the ground relied on by the motion judge who heard the Crown’s

motion; to the extent leave was required, he implicitly granted it. But more

fundamentally, the procedural rule relied on by the respondent cannot trump the

clear effect of the CLPA provision that required the court to treat the action as a

nullity. Moreover, s. 25 of the CLPA states that the Crown may not be noted in

default without leave of the court, obtained on a motion made with notice to the

Crown, and there is no evidence such leave was obtained.

[17]   The respondent also argues that an effect of the noting in default is that the

defendant is deemed to admit the allegations in the claim. Since r. 21.01(1)(a),

under which the Crown moved, is available only for questions of law that arise from

the pleadings, and the only pleading was the claim, there was no basis to consider

facts surrounding the failure to give notice. We reject this argument. On a motion

under r. 21.01(1)(a), evidence may be admitted in the discretion of the court:

r. 21.01(2)(a). Here, the motion judge properly exercised his discretion to consider

such evidence. As this court noted in Beardsley, at para. 10, rejecting a similar

argument to the one advanced here by the respondent: “Proper notice is a

necessary pre-condition to the right to sue the Crown. It would defeat the interests
                                         Page: 8


of justice to restrict a defendant’s right to adduce evidence that proper notice was

not given.”

[18]   The respondent also argues that estoppel should operate to prevent the

Crown from asserting that the action is a nullity. She points to the fact that an

application she brought to the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario (“HRTO”), against

the Ministry of the Solicitor General and four individuals, was dismissed in August

2020 on the basis of the existence of her action. Section 34(11) of the Human

Rights Code, R.S.O. 1990, c. H.19, bars an HRTO application where there is an

existing civil action dealing with the same alleged rights infringement. The

respondent argues that the Crown got the benefit of the existence of the action for

the purpose of the dismissal of the HRTO application, and should be estopped

from claiming the action is a nullity.

[19]   We do not accept this argument.

[20]   First, we are not satisfied that estoppel, any more than waiver, could have

any effect on the operation of the CLPA given s. 18(6). Second, even assuming it

could operate, we are not satisfied it would operate here.

[21]   The motion judge made no findings that the respondent changed her

position based on anything the Crown said to her or to anyone else, and he found

the Crown acted in good faith throughout. The record is clear that the Crown

unequivocally told the respondent that it considered the existing action against it
                                        Page: 9


to be a nullity. It was the respondent who not only persisted in maintaining the

action but also commenced concurrent HRTO proceedings. This is what created

the overlap in proceedings attracting the operation of s. 34(11) of the Human

Rights Code, under which the HRTO has no discretion but to dismiss a human

rights claim if there is a concurrent civil action, without regard to whether the civil

action may be unsuccessful or struck out: Aba-Alkhail v. University of Ottawa,

2012 HRTO 656, at para. 26; Grogan v. Ontario (Human Rights Tribunal),

2012 ONSC 319, at para. 48, leave to appeal refused, M41084. In any event, the

respondent was free to make the Crown’s position that the existing action against

it was a nullity known to the HRTO if she believed that would assist her in resisting

dismissal of her HRTO application.

[22]   Moreover, although the Crown is the only formally named defendant in the

action, the claim refers to the conduct of various individuals and entities. The

motion judge referred to the respondent having taken the position that individual

police officers, the police services board, and the City of Quinte West are also

defendants to the action. He invited her to have the claim “clearly and on its face

stipulate who she is naming as a party defendant”. It remains open to her to pursue

that in the Superior Court – it is only as against the Crown that the action is a nullity.

The HRTO’s reasons for dismissing the application reflect this uncertainty as to

who in addition to the Crown are or may be parties to the action – those reasons

referred to the action as being against “all-but-one of the respondents” to the
                                    Page: 10


HRTO proceeding. It was that substantial overlap that was relied on by the HRTO

in dismissing the application.

CONCLUSION

[23]   The appeal is allowed. The statement of claim as against the Crown is struck

out and the action as against the Crown is dismissed as a nullity.

[24]   The parties may make written submissions, not exceeding three pages

each, on the costs of the motion before the motion judge and of the appeal. The

submissions of the Crown are to be delivered within ten days of the release of

these reasons. The submissions of the respondent are to be delivered within ten

days of the Crown’s submissions being delivered.

                                                                        “Doherty J.A.”
                                                                     “B. Zarnett J.A.”
                                                                      “L. Sossin J.A.”
