                   COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

                  CITATION: Wigdor v. Facebook Canada Ltd., 2026 ONCA 572
                                                           DATE: 20260807
                                                DOCKET: COA-25-CV-1031

                        George, Copeland and Gomery JJ.A.

BETWEEN

                                  Daniel Wigdor

                                                           Applicant (Appellant/
                                             Respondent by way of cross-appeal)

                                       and

                 Facebook Canada Ltd. and Meta Platforms, Inc.

                                                    Respondents (Respondents/
                                              Appellants by way of cross-appeal)


Alysha Shore and Daniel Rosenbluth, for the appellant/respondent by way of
cross-appeal

George Avraam and Jennifer Bernardo, for the respondents/appellants by way of
cross-appeal

Tim Lawson, Brandon Kain, Marco Fimiani and John Gray, for the intervener,
Canadian Association of Counsel to Employers

Heard: April 23, 2026

On appeal from the order of Justice Janet Leiper of the Superior Court of Justice,
dated July 8, 2025, with reasons reported at 2025 ONSC 4861.



Copeland J.A.:
                                     Page: 2


[1]   This appeal arises from a wrongful dismissal application seeking damages

in lieu of common law reasonable notice.

[2]   The appellant, Daniel Wigdor (“Dr. Wigdor”), appeals from the application

judge’s order dismissing his claim for the value of Restricted Stock Units (“RSUs”)

that would have vested during the common law notice period. He also appeals the

application judge’s denial of punitive damages.

[3]   The respondents, Facebook Canada Ltd. and Meta Platforms, Inc.

(“Facebook Canada” and “Meta”, and collectively, “the Respondents”), cross-

appeal from the application judge’s determination that the termination provisions

of the employment agreement were void for contravening minimum standards in

the Employment Standards Act 2000, S.O. 2000, c. 41 (the “ESA”), and ordering

the Respondents to pay damages for 10-months reasonable common law notice.

[4]   For the reasons that follow, I would allow Dr. Wigdor’s appeal, except in

relation to punitive damages, and dismiss the Respondents’ cross-appeal.

[5]   The application judge did not err in finding that the termination provisions of

the employment agreement contravened the ESA’s minimum standards, and thus,

did not validly contract out of Dr. Wigdor’s common law right to reasonable notice.

[6]   However, the application judge erred in her interpretation of ss. 60 and 61

of the ESA and their application to Dr. Wigdor’s entitlement to the RSUs. Section

60(1)(a) of the ESA provides, inter alia, that an employer shall not alter any “term
                                               Page: 3


or condition of employment” during the period of notice of termination under the

Act. Section 61(1) of the ESA, which governs pay in lieu of notice on termination,

provides in (a) that an employer must, as a condition of termination without notice

or with less notice than required under the ESA, pay the employee “a lump sum

equal to what the employee would have been entitled to receive under section 60

had notice been given in accordance with that section.” The RSU Agreements,

which were incorporated by reference into the employment agreement, purported

to disentitle Dr. Wigdor to further vesting of RSUs immediately on termination. This

is contrary to the obligation on employers in s. 60(1)(a) not to alter any “term or

condition of employment” during the notice period. As a result, the termination

provisions of the RSU Agreements, incorporated into the employment agreement,

contravene the ESA and are unenforceable. Dr. Wigdor is entitled to damages for

the value of the RSUs that would have vested during the 10-month common law

reasonable notice period.


A.      FACTUAL BACKGROUND

[7]     Dr. Wigdor is a tenured professor in the Department of Computer Science

at the University of Toronto. His area of study is human-computer interaction. Meta

is a public company, formerly known as Facebook, Inc.1 Facebook Canada is

Meta’s Canadian subsidiary.



1 In 2021, Facebook, Inc. changed its corporate identity to Meta. Following the convention of the parties

and the application judge, I refer to the Canadian subsidiary’s parent company as Meta throughout these
                                          Page: 4


[8]    In 2011, Dr. Wigdor founded Chatham Inc. (“Chatham”) to provide

technology consulting services for financial, legal, and technological firms. In

August of 2016, he began providing services to one of Meta’s subsidiaries. By

2018, he was engaged in project management and overseeing a staff team of 20

within Chatham and 150 members of the Meta “Reality Labs” team.

[9]    In 2020, Meta and Dr. Wigdor negotiated a share-purchase agreement to

sell Chatham to Meta. Meta’s motivation for purchasing Chatham was to integrate

Dr. Wigdor and his team into Meta’s workforce. The share-purchase agreement

contemplated that Chatham’s employees, including Dr. Wigdor, would be

terminated by Chatham and begin employment with Facebook Canada.

Chatham’s consulting division was spun out into a standalone company. Meta then

purchased the shares of this company via its wholly-owned subsidiaries.

[10]   The share purchase agreement for Chatham contained several features

designed to ensure that Dr. Wigdor and other key personnel accepted and

maintained employment with the Respondents. For example,

       (a)    Meta held back 50 percent of the purchase price and required that

              Dr. Wigdor and at least three key employees from Chatham remain

              employed by Meta or its subsidiaries for at least three years to receive

              the funds; and


reasons, although agreements entered into before the name change identify Facebook, Inc. as the
contracting party.
                                       Page: 5


       (b)   As part of the purchase, Meta agreed to grant Dr. Wigdor 43,380

             RSUs in Meta that were valued at US$7.5 million. The RSUs are a

             form of equity compensation given to Meta employees that, once

             vested under a four-year schedule, become common shares in the

             corporation.

[11]   Dr. Wigdor began employment with Facebook Canada on September 12,

2020. His title was Director, Research Science. Dr. Wigdor’s employment was

governed by an employment agreement signed on August 27, 2020 (the

“employment agreement”).

[12]   As an employee of Facebook Canada, Dr. Wigdor continued work on the

project he had begun in his consulting role via Chatham. He managed a team of

approximately 150 people. He enjoyed an employment arrangement which

permitted him to work at 80 percent of a full-time equivalent position with Facebook

Canada, approximately 32 hours per week, while retaining his position at the

University of Toronto on a part-time basis. His initial base salary was $232,000

(later raised to $253,100.37), with additional benefits. In addition, a letter that was

incorporated as part of the employment agreement provided:


             This letter is to confirm that your employer intends to
             recommend to the Board of Directors of Facebook, Inc.
             that you be granted restricted stock units (“RSUs”) by
             Facebook, Inc. under the terms of the 2012 Equity
             Incentive Plan (as amended and restated on June 20,
             2016) (the “Plan”). Subject to the approval of Facebook,
                                    Page: 6


             Inc. Board of Directors or committee thereof (the
             “Board”), you will be granted 43,380 RSUs under the
             Plan. [Emphasis in original.]

[13]   The RSUs were governed by Meta’s 2012 Equity Incentive Plan (referenced

in the letter included as part of the employment agreement) with additional terms

set out in the RSU Agreements. There are four RSU Agreements, one for each

grant in 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023 (collectively, the “RSU Agreements”).

The language contained in the 2020 RSU Agreement regarding forfeiture of

unvested RSUs upon termination changed in 2021 and is the same in each of the

2021-2023 RSU Agreements. I discuss the provisions in the employment

agreement and the RSU Agreements in more detail in the analysis section of these

reasons.

[14]   Facebook Canada terminated Dr. Wigdor’s employment by letter on

December 4, 2023, effective December 8, 2023.

[15]   The termination letter stated that Dr. Wigdor would be given his minimum

entitlements under the ESA, amounting to 8-weeks pay in lieu of notice and

12.5-weeks of statutory severance pay under the ESA. It further provided that he

would receive certain supplemental entitlements contemplated by the employment

agreement if he signed a release.
                                      Page: 7


[16]   Dr. Wigdor did not sign the release appended to the termination letter

because it included a term that precluded him from disputing the forfeiture of

unvested RSUs.

[17]   The Respondents did not deliver payment to Dr. Wigdor of the ESA

entitlements referred to in the termination letter until 10 months after he was

terminated, and only after the application that forms the basis of this appeal was

commenced. At trial, Dr. Wigdor contended that the late payment of the ESA

entitlements was intentionally designed to pressure him to sign the release or was

a reprisal for his failure to do so. The Respondents took the position that the delay

in paying the ESA entitlements was the result of an administrative oversight. This

issue was the basis for Dr. Wigdor’s claim of punitive damages.


B.     THE APPLICATION JUDGE’S DECISION

[18]   The application judge found that the termination provisions in the

employment agreement were contrary to the ESA because they purported to

contract out of Dr. Wigdor’s right under s. 9 of the ESA to have his years of service

with his prior employer (Chatham) recognized for the purpose of calculating his

termination entitlements after the sale. As a result of that finding, the termination

provisions in the employment agreement were unenforceable, and Dr. Wigdor was

entitled to damages under common law principles. The application judge found

that he should receive 10-months notice, less working notice, statutory pay in lieu

of notice, and severance pay, as well as any mitigation income he earned during
                                      Page: 8


the statutory period (that being income over and above what he was earning while

employed).

[19]   With respect to the RSUs, Dr. Wigdor argued that Meta’s RSU Agreements,

which were incorporated by reference into the employment agreement, breached

ss. 60 and 61 of the ESA.

[20]   The portions of ss. 60 and 61 relevant to this appeal are as follows:

             Requirements during notice period

             60 (1) During a notice period under section 57 or 58, the employer,

                   (a) shall not reduce the employee’s wage rate or alter any other
                   term or condition of employment;

                   (b) shall in each week pay the employee the wages the
                   employee is entitled to receive, which in no case shall be less
                   than his or her regular wages for a regular work week; and

                   (c) shall continue to make whatever benefit plan contributions
                   would be required to be made in order to maintain the
                   employee’s benefits under the plan until the end of the notice
                   period.

                                                ...

             Pay instead of notice

             61 (1) An employer may terminate the employment of an employee
             without notice or with less notice than is required under section 57 or
             58 if the employer,

                   (a) pays to the employee termination pay in a lump sum equal
                   to the amount the employee would have been entitled to receive
                   under section 60 had notice been given in accordance with that
                   section; and
                                       Page: 9


                    (b) continues to make whatever benefit plan contributions would
                    be required to be made in order to maintain the benefits to
                    which the employee would have been entitled had he or she
                    continued to be employed during the period of notice that he or
                    she would otherwise have been entitled to receive.

[21]   Section 60(1)(a) requires that during the notice period, an employer “shall

not reduce the employee’s wage rate or alter any other term or condition of

employment”. Dr. Wigdor argued that the requirement in s. 60(1)(a) not to alter a

term or condition of employment during the notice period is incorporated into the

calculation of pay in lieu of notice under s. 61(1)(a) of the ESA because s. 61(1)(a)

refers to payment of a lump sum “equal to the amount” the employee would have

been entitled to receive if given working notice under s. 60.

[22]   The application judge found that Dr. Wigdor was not entitled to damages for

the RSUs that would have vested during the common law notice period. She held

that s. 60 of the ESA only applied to working notice, while s. 61 only applied to pay

in lieu of notice. Based on this interpretation of ss. 60 and 61, the application judge

considered Dr. Wigdor’s entitlement to damages for the RSUs only under s. 61.

She found that the RSUs did not fall within the scope of Dr. Wigdor’s entitlements

under s. 61 because, in her view, unlike s. 60, s. 61 did not prohibit an employer

from altering any “term or condition of employment” during the notice period. As a

result, she found that the 2020 RSU Agreement did not contravene the ESA and

was enforceable. The application judge also found that the 2021-2023 RSU
                                      Page: 10


Agreements were enforceable and did not permit ongoing vesting during the notice

period.

[23]   The application judge dismissed Dr. Wigdor’s claim for punitive damages.

[24]   I discuss the reasoning of the application judge on each of these issues in

more detail in the analysis below.


C.     THE GROUNDS OF APPEAL AND CROSS-APPEAL

[25]   Dr. Wigdor argues that the application judge erred in refusing to award

damages for the RSUs that would have vested during the common law reasonable

notice period. He argues that the provisions of the RSU Agreements that purported

to terminate vesting of RSUs at the time of termination were invalid because they

did not meet ESA minimum standards. The application judge erred in finding that

the RSU Agreements complied with ESA minimum standards by (1) assessing

compliance with the ESA only based on s. 61 of the Act; and (2) by committing

errors in her statutory interpretation of s. 61 of the ESA.

[26]   Dr. Wigdor also argues that the application judge erred in declining to award

him punitive damages.

[27]   In the cross-appeal, the Respondents argue that the application judge erred

in her interpretation of the employment agreement, and in particular, in finding that

the termination clause contravened the ESA, was void, and thus could not validly
                                     Page: 11


contract out of Dr. Wigdor’s common law entitlement to reasonable notice of

termination.


D.     ANALYSIS

1.     The legal framework for termination clauses and ESA compliance

[28]   I begin with the legal framework in relation to termination clauses and

compliance with ESA minimum standards because it is relevant to both the appeal

and the cross-appeal.

[29]   At common law, an employee hired for an indefinite period can be dismissed

without cause, but the employer must give reasonable notice or pay in lieu of

notice. The common law presumption of termination with reasonable notice can be

rebutted if the employment contract clearly specifies some other period of

notice: Wood v. Fred Deeley Imports Ltd., 2017 ONCA 158, 134 O.R. (3d) 481,

at paras. 15-16; Machtinger v. HOJ Industries Ltd., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 986, at

pp. 997-98.

[30]   However, in Ontario, the ESA sets minimum standards for terms of

employment. Pursuant to s. 5 of the ESA, employers and employees cannot

contract out of the minimum standards in the Act. Any purported contracting out is

void. As a result, terms of employment contracts that provide for notice periods will

only be enforceable if they comply with ESA minimum standards. Among the
                                      Page: 12


minimum standards set by the ESA are minimum notice periods upon termination:

ss. 54-61.

[31]   In the context of termination clauses, these principles have the following

effect: if a termination clause does not comply with ESA minimum standards, it will

be unenforceable, the common law presumption of reasonable notice for

termination will not be rebutted, and the employee will be entitled to common law

reasonable notice of termination: Wood, at para. 16; Machtinger, at p. 1000.

[32]   The basic principles for the assessment of whether a termination clause in

an employment contract complies with ESA minimum standards are well

established: see Wood, at paras. 28, 43-51; Machtinger, at pp. 1002-05. Four

points are of particular importance to this appeal.

[33]   First, the ESA is remedial legislation, intended to protect the interests of

employees. As a result, courts should favour an interpretation of the ESA that

encourages employers to comply with its minimum standards over an

interpretation that does not do so.

[34]   Second, termination clauses should be interpreted in a way that encourages

employers to draft agreements that comply with the ESA. If the only consequence

for an employer of drafting a termination clause that does not comply with ESA

minimum standards is an order that they comply, employers will have little
                                      Page: 13


incentive to draft a lawful termination clause at the start of the employment

relationship.

[35]    Third, a termination clause will rebut the presumption of reasonable notice

only if its wording is clear. Employees are entitled to know at the beginning of their

employment what their entitlement will be at the end of their employment.

[36]    Fourth, the interpretation of a termination clause and whether it meets the

minimum standards set out in the ESA is based on the wording of the clause. Thus,

even if the employer complies with the ESA minimum standards at the time of

termination, that compliance does not have the effect of remedying a termination

provision that does not comply with the ESA minimum standards in a contract

entered into at the beginning of the employment.


2.      The Cross-appeal

       a.   Did the application judge err in finding that the termination clause
            in the employment agreement violated the ESA by purporting to
            contract out of its minimum standards?

[37]    I address the cross-appeal first because the parties agree that, if the cross-

appeal is allowed and the termination clause in the employment agreement is

found to be compliant with the ESA, then there would be no issue about damages

in lieu of common law notice because the employment agreement would validly

contract out of the common law presumption of reasonable notice. This would be
                                               Page: 14


fatal to Dr. Wigdor’s claim that he is entitled to damages for the RSUs that would

have vested during the common law notice period.


           i.      Positions of the parties

[38]    The Respondents argue that the application judge: (1) failed to read the

employment agreement as a whole, and (2) failed to consider the factual matrix as

context for interpreting the employment agreement. On the first point, the

Respondents argue that the application judge failed to give effect to all terms in

the employment agreement. Specifically, they refer to s. 1 of the employment

agreement, which provides that the employer would recognize Dr. Wigdor’s

employment with Chatham when calculating his minimum entitlements under the

ESA, and the reference in s. 12.a of the employment agreement to “including any

prior service with Chatham Labs Inc.”, which the Respondents argue recognized

his prior service with Chatham. On the second point, the Respondents argue that

the application judge failed to consider that Dr. Wigdor used counsel to negotiate

the sale of Chatham, including the employment agreement.2

[39]    The Respondents argue that both of these errors attract the correctness

standard of review, but in the alternative argue that they constitute palpable and

overriding errors.



2 Although the Respondents argue that the application judge erred in finding that the termination provisions

of the employment agreement contravened ESA minimum standards, they do not challenge her finding that
the quantum of common law notice Dr. Wigdor was entitled to in light of that finding was 10 months.
                                     Page: 15


[40]   Dr. Wigdor argues that the application judge made no error in interpreting

the employment agreement. The application judge properly considered the terms

in the employment agreement as a whole. Contrary to s. 9 of the ESA, the

termination provisions in the agreement contemplated that Dr. Wigdor could be

terminated on two-weeks notice during the first three months of his employment

with the Respondents. These provisions were unlawful because from the day

Dr. Wigdor began work for the Respondents, he was entitled to be treated as

having nine years’ service for the purposes of notice under the ESA.

[41]   Dr. Wigdor argues that on this issue of contractual interpretation, the

applicable standard of review is palpable and overriding error, and the application

judge made no such error.


         ii.    Standard of review

[42]   In the absence of an extricable error of law, the standard of review is

palpable and overriding error: Wood, at para. 43; Sattva Capital Corp. v.

Creston Moly Corp., 2014 SCC 53, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 633, at paras. 50-55.


         iii.   The application judge made no palpable and overriding error
                in her interpretation of the employment agreement

[43]   As I explain below, I am not persuaded that the application judge made any

palpable and overriding error in her interpretation of the termination provisions in

the employment agreement.
                                    Page: 16


[44]   Sections 1 and 12 are the termination provisions of the employment

agreement. They provide as follows:


            1. Commencement of Employment. Subject to the
            closing of the Acquisition and your satisfying the pre-
            employment condition in Section 4 of this Agreement, the
            “Start Date” of your indefinite employment with the
            Company shall be a date to be determined by the
            Company, subsequent to the closing of the Acquisition.
            … No employment with a previous employer counts
            towards your period of continuous employment with the
            Company [Facebook], except that the Company will
            recognize your service with Chatham Labs Inc. and its
            predecessors, beginning on July 1, 2011, only for the
            purpose of determining any minimum required
            entitlements under the Ontario Employment Standards
            Act, 2000, as amended from time to time (“Employment
            Standards Legislation”) which will govern your
            employment.

            12. Termination. Your employment with the Company is
            on an indefinite basis. You understand and agree that
            this Section 12 will apply throughout your employment
            with the Company, even if your role, duties and
            responsibilities or compensation change significantly
            over time. Although you will not be entitled to any
            reasonable notice or entitlements except as set out
            below, whether at common law or otherwise, in no event
            will your entitlements upon termination be less than those
            minimum entitlements set out in Employment Standards
            Legislation.

            a. Termination without Cause During the first three (3)
            months of your employment, including any prior service
            with Chatham Labs Inc. or its predecessors, the
            Company may terminate your employment at any time by
            providing you with two (2) weeks of advance notice or
            base pay in lieu of notice.
                                     Page: 17


             After the first three (3) months of your employment, the
             Company may terminate your employment without cause
             by providing you with all of your minimum entitlements
             under Employment Standards Legislation, including
             notice of termination, or payment in lieu of notice,
             benefits continuation (if required), and severance pay (if
             applicable). In addition to your minimum statutory
             entitlements and in exchange for a full and final release
             in favour of the Company, the Company will also provide
             you with an additional 4 weeks of base pay for every year
             of completed service, up to a maximum of 12 months’
             base pay (inclusive of any Employment Standards
             Legislation notice and, if applicable, severance amount).
             [Emphasis in italics added.]

[45]   The application judge began by outlining the applicable law in relation to

termination clauses and the ESA, referencing cases including Wood and

Machtinger. The Respondents take no issue with her summary of the applicable

law.

[46]   The application judge found that the first paragraph of s. 12.a of the

employment agreement contravened the minimum standards in the ESA. It

provided that Dr. Wigdor could be terminated on two-weeks notice in the first three

months of his employment, in circumstances where s. 9 of the ESA mandated that

his nine years of previous employment at Chatham, before the Respondents

acquired it, be included in calculating his entitlement to notice and severance under

the ESA. The application judge found that, based on his nine years of employment

with Chatham, had Dr. Wigdor been terminated within three months of

commencing to work for the Respondents, under the ESA he would have been
                                      Page: 18


entitled to receive (i) eight weeks of notice based on all wages and benefits,

(ii) continued vacation pay accrual and benefits during the eight week notice

period, and (iii) nine weeks of severance pay. Section 12.a contravened the ESA

by providing for only two weeks of base pay on termination in the first three months

of employment. She found that the general provisions in s. 12 promising

compliance with the ESA could not cure the provisions in s. 12.a which were

contrary to the ESA, referencing this court’s decision in Rossman v. Canadian

Solar, 2019 ONCA 992, 444 D.L.R. (4th) 131, at para. 40.

[47]   I see no palpable and overriding error in the application judge’s interpretation

of the termination provisions of the employment agreement.

[48]   The clear intent of s. 12.a was to purport to give the Respondents the ability

to terminate Dr. Wigdor on two-weeks notice during the first three months of his

employment.

[49]   This contravenes ss. 9, 54, 57, and 59-61 of the ESA. Pursuant to s. 9 of the

ESA, where a business is sold and an employee continues to be employed by the

purchaser, the employee’s prior employment with the seller must be included for

the purpose of any subsequent calculation of the employee’s length of

employment. Thus, Dr. Wigdor’s rights on termination under the ESA had to be

calculated from the start of his employment with Chatham in 2011. The application

judge correctly found that, pursuant to ss. 54, 57, and 59-61, from the outset of
                                     Page: 19


Dr. Wigdor’s employment with the Respondents in 2020, he was statutorily entitled

to eight-weeks termination pay under ss. 54 and 57 of the ESA, as well as

continued vacation pay accrual and benefits during the eight-week notice period,

and severance pay of nine weeks, pursuant to ss. 64 and 65 of the ESA.

[50]   The Respondents’ argument that the application judge did not consider the

employment contract as a whole, and in particular, did not consider s. 1 and the

“including” portion of s. 12.a is without merit. In her summary of the relevant

provisions of the employment agreement, the application judge underlined the

portions of the agreement that the Respondents relied on, and in her analysis, she

specifically referred to and considered the Respondents’ arguments that portions

of s. 1 and s. 12 made the termination provisions compliant with the ESA when

read in the context of the agreement as a whole.

[51]   I would add that I agree with Dr. Wigdor that the Respondents’ proposed

interpretation of s. 12.a of the agreement is strained in the context of the agreement

as a whole, for three reasons. First, s. 12.a clearly refers to two-weeks notice or

pay in lieu if termination occurs in the first three months of employment. The

Respondents seek to rely on the language in s. 12.a of “including any prior service

with Chatham Labs Inc. or its predecessors” to avoid the clear language of “two

(2) weeks of advance notice or base pay in lieu of notice”. But in order to read

s. 12.a as the Respondents propose, the three-month probationary period would

have to have run from the outset of Dr. Wigdor’s employment with Chatham in
                                      Page: 20


2011, and not from the start of his employment with the Respondents in 2020. If

the Respondents’ interpretation were correct, there would be no need for s. 12.a

because the three-month probationary period would have expired in 2011.

[52]   Second, s. 12.a refers to the right of the “Company” to terminate Dr. Wigdor

on two-weeks notice in the first three months of his employment. The employment

contract makes clear in the first sentence that the “Company” is Facebook Canada.

Again, on the Respondents’ interpretation, s. 12.a would make no sense because

Facebook Canada was not Dr. Wigdor’s employer in 2011 and had no ability to

terminate him in 2011.

[53]   Third, as Dr. Wigdor points out, the Respondents’ proposed interpretation of

the first paragraph of s. 12.a is inconsistent with the entire scheme of s. 12.a of the

employment agreement. The second paragraph of s. 12.a provides that after the

first three months of employment, the Respondents may terminate employment

without cause by providing all of the minimum ESA entitlements, and:


             In addition to your minimum statutory entitlements and in
             exchange for a full and final release in favour of the
             Company, the Company will also provide you with an
             additional 4 weeks of base pay for every year of
             completed service, up to a maximum of 12 months’ base
             pay (inclusive of any Employment Standards Legislation
             notice and, if applicable, severance amount).

[54]   On the Respondents’ interpretation of s. 12.a, the formula of an additional

“4 weeks of base pay for every year of completed service” is meaningless and
                                       Page: 21


does no work. On the Respondents’ interpretation, Dr. Wigdor would have qualified

for the full 12-months additional pay on the first day of his employment with the

Respondents. By recognizing his full 9 years of service with Chatham, Dr. Wigdor

would have qualified immediately for 8 weeks of statutory notice, 9 weeks of

severance, and 36 (9 years x 4 weeks per year) additional weeks pay on signing

a release, for a total of 53 weeks pay (higher than the 12-month cap in the second

paragraph of s. 12.a).

[55]   The Respondents argue that a finding of ambiguity in a termination clause

requires more than the existence of competing interpretations, relying on this

court’s decision in Bertsch v. Datastealth Inc., 2025 ONCA 379, at para. 9. This

general legal principle is, of course, correct. But as I will explain, it does not assist

the Respondents in this case.

[56]   If a termination clause is ambiguous, it must be interpreted in favour of the

employee: Wood, at para. 28; Rossman, at para. 24 and 37. However, for genuine

ambiguity to exist, there must be more than competing interpretations of the

clause. The question of ambiguity is determined by an objective assessment of

whether there are two or more reasonable interpretations of the clause: Bertsch,

at para. 9; Amberber v. IBM Canada Ltd., 2018 ONCA 571, 424 D.L.R. (4th) 169,

at para. 45; Rossman, at para. 24.
                                     Page: 22


[57]   These principles do not assist the Respondents in this appeal because the

application judge did not find that the termination provision was ambiguous. She

found that it provided for termination on two-weeks notice or pay in lieu if

termination occurred during the first three months of Dr. Wigdor’s employment with

the Respondents. I see no error in that conclusion. I have explained above why

the Respondents’ interpretation of the termination provisions is not a reasonable

interpretation of the termination provisions.

[58]   I turn then to the Respondents’ argument that Dr. Wigdor had counsel at the

time the sale and the employment agreement were negotiated. The Respondents

did not make this argument before the application judge. The Respondents’ factum

before the application judge was filed in the appeal record. Although the

Respondents’ referred in passing, once, to the fact that Dr. Wigdor was

represented by counsel when he negotiated the sale of Chatham and his

employment agreement, their submissions about the validity of the employment

agreement before the application judge did not rely on the fact that Dr. Wigdor was

represented by counsel as a material surrounding circumstance to interpreting the

employment agreement. Indeed, before the application judge, the Respondents

did not make any arguments based on surrounding circumstances. Rather, they

argued that read as a whole and in context, the termination provisions of the

employment agreement were clear and were compliant with the ESA.
                                     Page: 23


[59]   Further, the Respondents have provided no authority for the proposition that

the fact that a party was represented by counsel is a relevant factual circumstance

to be considered when interpreting an employment agreement. To the contrary,

this court has cautioned against allowing considerations of an employee’s

sophistication and access to independent advice to override the plain language

in termination provisions: Rahman v. Cannon Design Architecture Inc.,

2022 ONCA 451, at para. 24; see also Livshin v. The Clinic Network Canada Inc.,

2021 ONSC 6796, 159 O.R. (3d) 430, at paras. 57 and 68.

[60]   In Sattva, at para. 57, Rothstein J. cautioned against allowing the

circumstances surrounding the formation of a contract to overwhelm the words of

the agreement. At para. 58, he described the limits of surrounding circumstances

relevant to interpretation of a contract as consisting “only of objective evidence of

the background facts at the time of the execution of the contract, that is, knowledge

that was or reasonably ought to have been within the knowledge of both parties at

or before the date of contracting” (citations omitted). The fact that a party is

represented by counsel does not fall within these limits.

[61]   The Respondents’ argument seeks to rely on Dr. Wigdor’s receipt of legal

advice when he entered into the contract to suggest that he is not entitled to the

same clarity in an employment contract as an employee not represented by

counsel at the time the contract is formed. I reject that proposition.
                                         Page: 24


[62]    For these reasons, I see no error in the application judge’s conclusion that

the termination provisions of the employment agreement contravened the ESA,

were thus unenforceable, and Dr. Wigdor was entitled to common law reasonable

notice.


3.      The Appeal

       a.        Did the application judge err in denying Dr. Wigdor damages for
                 the RSUs what would have vested during the notice period?

            i.      Structure of the issue

[63]    I begin by outlining the structure of the legal issue in relation to the RSUs.

Under the Supreme Court’s decision in Matthews v. Ocean Nutrition,

2020 SCC 26, [2020] 3 S.C.R. 64, at paras. 52-55, where there is an issue about

whether a terminated employee is entitled to damages for a bonus or similar

entitlement that would have been payable during the common law reasonable

notice period, a court should ask two questions:

        (1)       But for the termination, would the employee have been entitled to the

                  bonus during the reasonable notice period?

        (2)       If so, does the wording of the bonus plan unambiguously alter or

                  remove the employee’s common law right to reasonable notice?
                                    Page: 25


See also: Paquette v. TeraGo Networks Inc., 2016 ONCA 618, 352 O.A.C. 1, at

paras. 30-31; Taggart v. Canada Life Assurance Company (2006), 146 A.C.W.S.

(3d) 674 (Ont. C.A.), at paras. 12-16.

[64]   This approach is in accordance with the basic principles of damages on

termination based on the employer’s obligation to provide reasonable notice of

termination as set out in Machtinger and Wood. If the employee would have been

entitled to the bonus had they continued to be employed during the reasonable

notice period, and if the terms of the bonus plan (i.e., part of the employment

contract) do not remove the common law right to reasonable notice, or do so

unlawfully such that they are void, then the damages for the failure to provide

reasonable notice must include the bonus entitlement: Matthews, at paras. 53 and

76.

[65]   In this appeal, there is no dispute that had Dr. Wigdor remained employed

by the Respondents during the 10-month notice period, he would have been

entitled to approximately US$4.7 million in RSUs that would have vested during

the 10-month common law notice period. The chart below, produced by the

Appellant and unchallenged by the Respondents, outlines the details of the vesting

dates and values of the RSUs during the 10-month common law notice period:
                                       Page: 26


 Vest date          Value per 2020     2021     2022      2023    Value (US$)
                    share on   Grant   Grant    Grant     Grant
                    close of
                    business
                    on vesting
                    date (US$)

 February 15,       $484.03    2711    49       167       208     $1,517,434.05
 2024
 (2.5 months
 after notice of
 termination)

 May 15, 2024       $481.54    2711    48       167       208     $1,509,146.36
 (5.5 months
 after notice of
 termination)

 August 15,         $537.33    2712    49       168       208     $1,685,066.88
 2024
 (8.5 months
 after notice of
 termination)

 Subtotal                      8,134   146      502       623

 Total (all years                            9,405                US$ 4,711,647.29
 combined)



[66]   The dispute in this appeal engages the second question asked in Matthews:

whether the terms of RSU Agreements that formed part of the employment

contract were contrary to ss. 60 and 61 of the ESA, such that they did not validly

alter/contract out of vesting entitlements during the common law reasonable notice

period. Answering this question requires interpreting ss. 60 and 61 of the ESA.

[67]   The statutory interpretation of provisions of the ESA is a question of law, and

thus reviewable on the correctness standard.
                                      Page: 27


         ii.   Positions of the parties

[68]   Dr. Wigdor argues that the application judge erred in law in finding that the

RSU Agreements did not contravene the ESA. He relies primarily on two

arguments.

[69]   First, he argues that the application judge erred because she assessed the

question of whether the RSU Agreements contravened the ESA from the

perspective of events at termination, rather than at the time the contract was

formed, contrary to Wood and Machtinger.

[70]   Second, he argues that the application judge erred in her interpretation of

s. 61 of the ESA. Her errors in interpreting s. 61 of the ESA were twofold: (i) in

finding that s. 60 of the ESA only applies to working notice, and that s. 61 alone –

without reference to s. 60 – governs pay in lieu of notice; and (ii) that s. 61 does

not contain a prohibition on altering “terms or conditions of employment”. As a

result of this error, the application judge incorrectly held that the obligation on an

employer in s. 60(1)(a) not to alter a term or condition of employment during the

statutory notice period had no application to the calculation of the “amount” of pay

an employee is entitled to in lieu of notice under s. 61(1)(a).

[71]   Dr. Wigdor argues that ss. 60 and 61 of the ESA must be read together.

Properly interpreted, the obligation on an employer in s. 61(1)(a) to pay in lieu of

notice “a lump sum equal to the amount the employee would have been entitled to

receive under section 60” had notice been given, means payment of a lump sum
                                     Page: 28


based on no alteration to a term or condition of employment during the notice

period.

[72]   Dr. Wigdor argues that the RSU Agreements contravene s. 60 of the ESA

because they purport to alter a term or condition of employment during the

statutory notice period by depriving employees of ongoing vesting of RSUs during

the notice period. As a result, the termination provisions of the RSU Agreements

are void, and Dr. Wigdor is entitled to damages for the RSUs that would have

vested during the common law reasonable notice period.

[73]   The Respondents argue that the application judge made no errors in her

interpretation of ss. 60 and 61 of the ESA. They argue that the application judge

was correct in holding that s. 61 of the ESA only required the payment of wages

and benefits as pay in lieu of statutory notice, and not other entitlements. They

argue that the application judge was correct not to “incorporate” s. 60 into s. 61.

They argue that unlike s. 60, s. 61 does not restrict an employer from altering

employment terms other than wages and benefits.

[74]   The Respondents argue that on a plain reading of the RSU Agreements,

vesting stopped when Dr. Wigdor’s employment was terminated (i.e., 4 days after

the notice of termination). This is not contrary to the ESA because only s. 61 is

applicable and it only provides for payment of wages and benefits in lieu of notice.
                                      Page: 29


[75]   I address these issues by first considering the statutory interpretation of

ss. 60 and 61 of the ESA. I then consider Dr. Wigdor’s arguments about two errors

made by the application judge in considering whether the obligation on an

employer in the ESA not to alter terms or conditions of employment during the

notice period applied to the RSU entitlements. Finally, I address why the RSU

Agreements contravened the requirement in the ESA not to alter terms or

conditions of employment during the statutory notice period, are thus void pursuant

to s. 5 of the ESA, and do not validly contract out of Dr. Wigdor’s common law

notice entitlements.


          iii.   Interpretation of ss. 60 and 61 of the ESA

[76]   I agree with Dr. Wigdor that, properly interpreted, s. 61(1)(a) of the ESA

requires that the lump sum payment to which an employee is entitled where pay is

provided in lieu of working notice must be calculated on the basis that there are no

alterations to the terms or conditions of employment during the statutory notice

period.

[77]   It is well-established that the words of a statutory provision must be read “in

their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with

the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament”:

Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27, at para. 21, quoting Professor

Driedger. In the more recent formulation, the court must consider the text, context,

and purpose of a legislative provision in interpreting it: Canada (Minister of
                                      Page: 30


Citizenship and Immigration) v. Vavilov, 2019 SCC 65, [2019] 4 S.C.R. 653, at

paras. 117-18.

[78]   As I will explain, in my view, the application judge fell into error by reading

ss. 60 and 61 of the ESA disjunctively, rather than reading them together, which is

required both by the text of both sections and by the general requirement that a

judge engaging in statutory interpretation must consider the context of the other

provisions in legislation in interpreting individual provisions.

[79]   I begin with the text. For ease of reference, I reproduce the portions of ss. 60

and 61 of the ESA relevant to this appeal:

             Requirements during notice period

             60 (1) During a notice period under section 57 or 58, the employer,

                    (a) shall not reduce the employee’s wage rate or alter any other
                    term or condition of employment;

                    (b) shall in each week pay the employee the wages the
                    employee is entitled to receive, which in no case shall be less
                    than his or her regular wages for a regular work week; and

                    (c) shall continue to make whatever benefit plan contributions
                    would be required to be made in order to maintain the
                    employee’s benefits under the plan until the end of the notice
                    period.

                                                 ...

             Pay instead of notice

             61 (1) An employer may terminate the employment of an employee
             without notice or with less notice than is required under section 57 or
             58 if the employer,
                                                Page: 31


                           (a) pays to the employee termination pay in a lump sum equal
                           to the amount the employee would have been entitled to receive
                           under section 60 had notice been given in accordance with that
                           section; and

                           (b) continues to make whatever benefit plan contributions would
                           be required to be made in order to maintain the benefits to
                           which the employee would have been entitled had he or she
                           continued to be employed during the period of notice that he or
                           she would otherwise have been entitled to receive. [Emphasis
                           added.]

[80]    Section 61(1)(a) defines the lump sum payment to which an employee is

entitled if termination is without notice or is with less notice than required under

ss. 57 or 58 of the ESA.3 Section 61(1)(a) clearly defines the amount of the

payment in lieu of notice as: “a lump sum equal to the amount the employee would

have been entitled to receive under section 60 had notice been given in

accordance with that section” (emphasis added). The text of s. 61(1)(a) is clear

that the lump sum must be “equal to” the amount the employee would have been

entitled to had they been given working notice under s. 60.

[81]    Three things are apparent from the text. First, it incorporates by reference

the content of s. 60. This includes the obligation in s. 60(1)(a) that an employer

shall not “alter any term or condition of employment” during the statutory notice

period. In other words, the calculation of the amount payable under s. 61(1)(a)

when pay in lieu of notice is given, must be done on the basis that there are no



3 An employee is also entitled to continuation of benefit plan contributions under s. 61(1)(b), but that is not

at issue in this appeal.
                                     Page: 32


alterations in the terms or conditions of employment during the statutory notice

period.

[82]   Second, the language in s. 61(1)(a) of a lump sum “equal to” the amount

that the employee would have been entitled to had they been given working notice

under s. 60 signals that the ss. 60 and 61 are to be read together. Taken together,

ss. 60 and 61 are intended to place the employee in the same financial position

whether they are given working notice or pay in lieu of notice. I return to this issue

in examining the purpose of the ESA, and of ss. 60 and 61, in particular.

[83]   Third, the use of the general word “amount” in s. 61(1)(a) – “a lump sum

equal to the amount” the employee would have been entitled to had working notice

been given – supports the conclusion that the entitlement to a lump sum is not

limited to regular wages, but includes any compensation the employee would have

been entitled to if they had been given working notice rather than pay in lieu of

notice.

[84]   Turning to context – and this flows from the text – ss. 60 and 61 of the ESA

must be read together. Section 61(1)(a) specifically incorporates the entitlements

for working notice under s. 60(1)(a) into the determination of the amount of pay in

lieu of notice. Quite apart from the clarity of the text of s. 61(1)(a) expressly

incorporating the entitlements under s. 60, the principles of statutory interpretation

require that ss. 60 and 61 be read together because they both address employee
                                      Page: 33


entitlements on termination: Ruth Sullivan, The Construction of Statutes, 7th ed.

(Toronto: LexisNexis, 2022) (online), at § 13.02. The context of reading ss. 60 and

61 together supports that the entitlement to pay in lieu of notice in s. 61(1)(a)

incorporates the obligation in s. 60(1)(a) that an employer may not alter terms or

conditions of employment during the statutory notice period.

[85]   Finally, the purpose of the ESA in general, and of ss. 60 and 61 in particular,

supports interpreting the language in s. 61(1)(a) of “a lump sum equal to the

amount the employee would have been entitled to receive under section 60 had

notice been given in accordance with that section” as meaning the amount the

employee would have been entitled to during the notice period in the absence of

alterations to terms or conditions of employment.

[86]   As already mentioned, the ESA is remedial legislation intended to protect

the interests of employees by requiring employers to comply with certain minimum

employment standards: Wood, at para. 28; Machtinger, at pp. 1002-03.

[87]   Read together – including the specific incorporation in s. 61(1)(a) of the

amount the employee would have been entitled to under s. 60 had working notice

been given – ss. 60 and 61 are intended to create a harmonious scheme to ensure

that employees are entitled to the same financial compensation whether their

employment is terminated with working notice or with pay in lieu of notice. In other

words, one of the purposes of the provisions is to ensure that employees are not
                                               Page: 34


worse off under either mode of termination. This conclusion is supported by

decisions of the Superior Court, which, in my view, correctly interpret the interplay

between ss. 60 and 61 of the ESA: Wilds v. 195612 Ontario Inc., 2024 ONSC 3452,

at para. 63(a); Groves v. UTS Consultants Inc., 2019 ONSC 5605, at

paras. 56-57; aff’d 2020 ONCA 630; Sandhu v. Solutions 2 go Inc.,

2012 ONSC 2073, at para. 35.4

[88]    In summary, an employee’s entitlement under s. 61(1)(a) where pay is given

in lieu of notice to “a lump sum equal to the amount the employee would have been

entitled to receive under section 60 had notice been given in accordance with that

section” means that the lump sum payment must be based on terms and conditions

of employment not being altered during the statutory notice period.


           iv.     The application judge erred in finding that the obligation on
                   employers not to alter terms or conditions of employment
                   during the statutory notice period in the ESA did not apply to
                   Dr. Wigdor’s RSU entitlements

[89]    As outlined above, Dr. Wigdor argues that the application judge made two

errors in finding that the obligation in the ESA on an employer not to alter terms or




4 The application judge considered Sandhu and found that it was inconsistent with this court’s decision in

North v. Metaswitch Networks Corporation, 2017 ONCA 790, 417 D.L.R. (4th) 429. Respectfully, the
application judge misread North. In a parenthetical comment at para. 11 of North, Feldman J.A. summarized
the entitlement under s. 60 as “(i.e., based on regular wages)”. The court in North was not considering the
obligation in s. 60 on an employer not to “alter any term or condition of employment”. The parenthetical
comment at para. 11 of North is summary and not intended to be an exhaustive interpretation of entitlements
under s. 60 of the ESA.
                                      Page: 35


conditions of employment during the statutory notice period did not apply to his

RSU entitlements. I agree with Dr. Wigdor and address each argument in turn.

[90]   First, the application judge erred by approaching her consideration of

whether the RSU Agreements complied with the ESA from the perspective of

events at the time of termination, rather than at the time the contract was entered

into. She approached the consideration of whether the RSU Agreements

contravened ESA minimum standards by considering the issue only from the

perspective of a termination with pay in lieu of notice – i.e., the manner in which

Dr. Wigdor was actually terminated.

[91]   This was an error. The legality and enforceability of terms in an employment

contract must be assessed at the time the contract is entered into, not at the time

of termination. The wording of the termination clause alone must be considered in

deciding whether it complies with ESA minimum standards. What the employer

actually did at the time of termination is irrelevant to whether the termination clause

complies with the ESA: Wood, at paras. 28, 43-51; Waksdale v. Swegon North

America Inc., 2020 ONCA 391, at para. 8.

[92]   The application judge only considered whether the RSU termination

provisions complied with the ESA through the lens of a termination where pay in

lieu of notice is given because, apart from four days of working notice, Dr. Wigdor

was given pay in lieu. By focusing only on circumstances where pay in lieu is given,
                                      Page: 36


the application judge failed to consider the effect of the terms of the contract at the

time the contract was entered into. In other words, in this case, if the terms of the

RSU Agreements purporting to deprive terminated employees of vesting of RSUs

during the notice period for a termination contravene the ESA because they alter

a term or condition of employment, they do so at the time the employment contract

is entered into whether for a particular employee a later termination is with working

notice or pay in lieu.

[93]   The second error made by the application judge is that she misinterpreted

ss. 60 and 61 of the ESA. The interpretation of ss. 60 and 61 applied by the

application judge is contrary to the statutory interpretation of the provisions I have

outlined above.

[94]   The application judge found that s. 60 of the ESA governs working notice

and that s. 61 governs pay in lieu of notice. She found that s. 60 requires that in

addition to paying wages and benefits during working notice, an employer may not

“alter any term or condition of employment.” However, reading s. 61 disjunctively

from s. 60, she found that s. 61 did not place an obligation on employers not to

alter any term or condition of employment during the statutory notice period. Thus,

the calculation of the lump sum for pay in lieu of notice under s. 61 was not required

to be done on the basis that there could be no alteration of any term or condition

of employment. She then went on to consider whether the RSU entitlements were

“benefits” under s. 61(1)(b), which requires an employer to continue “benefit plan
                                     Page: 37


contributions” during the statutory notice period. She found that the RSU

entitlements were not benefits within the meaning of s. 61(1)(b). She further found

that s. 61(1.1), which provides for the calculation of the lump sum of pay in lieu of

notice in circumstances where an employee does not have a regular work week.

She found that s. 61(1.1) was not applicable to the RSU entitlements because they

were not “wages”.

[95]   The application judge erred by reading ss. 60 and 61 disjunctively and

holding that the entitlement to a lump sum of pay in lieu of working notice was to

be calculated without reference to the obligation on an employer in s. 60(1)(a) not

to alter terms and conditions of employment during the statutory notice period.

[96]   The application judge failed entirely to consider Dr. Wigdor’s argument that

the language in s. 61(1)(a) that requires an employer to pay a lump sum “equal to

the amount” the employee would have been entitled to receive “under section 60”

had working notice been given incorporates the requirement from s. 60(1)(a) that

the employer may not “alter any term or condition of employment”. Rather, she

erroneously focussed on s. 61(1.1), which specifies the calculation of the lump sum

where an employee does not have a regular work week, and whether the RSUs

were somehow benefit plan contributions under s. 61(1)(b). Dr. Wigdor did not

base his entitlement to damages for the RSU entitlements on either of these

provisions.
                                              Page: 38


[97]    Because the application judge erred in her interpretation of ss. 60 and 61 of

the ESA, she failed to consider whether the terms of the RSU Agreements

incorporated as part of Dr. Wigdor’s employment contract contravened the ESA by

purporting to alter a term or condition of employment during the statutory notice

period. I turn to that issue in the next section of these reasons.

[98]    Before concluding on this issue, I address the arguments made by the

intervener, Canadian Association of Counsel to Employers. The intervener urges

the court to hold that any form of equity-based compensation can never constitute

“wages” within the definition in s. 1(1) of the ESA.

[99]    It is not necessary to address this issue to decide this appeal, and I decline

to do so. Dr. Wigdor’s argument is that the entitlement to RSUs constitutes a “term

or condition of employment” within the meaning of s. 60(1)(a) of the ESA.5 As

outlined above, I would decide the appeal on this basis. Whether the RSU

entitlement also constitutes “wages” need not be decided. The question of whether

equity-based compensation falls within the definition of “wages” in the ESA is

better left to an appeal where its resolution is determinative. I would add that,

depending on the evidentiary record, it may be the case that the answer is more




5 Dr. Wigdor made submissions, in the alternative and in response to the intervener’s submissions, on the

“wages” issue. However, his primary position was that it is not necessary to decide if equity-based
compensation is “wages” to decide this appeal.
                                    Page: 39


nuanced than a blanket determination that all forms of equity-based compensation

are or are not “wages” under the ESA.


        v.     The RSU Agreements contravene the ESA and as a result are
               void and do not remove Dr. Wigdor’s common law right to
               reasonable notice

[100] Applying the interpretation of ss. 60 and 61 of the ESA set out above, the

RSU Agreements contravene the ESA because they purport to alter a “term or

condition of employment” during the notice period under the ESA by depriving

employees of ongoing vesting during that period. As a result, the provisions of the

RSU Agreements relating to termination are void and do not remove Dr. Wigdor’s

common law rights. Dr. Wigdor is entitled to damages for the RSUs that would

have vested during the common law reasonable notice period.

[101] Dr. Wigdor’s entitlement to the RSUs was governed by the employment

agreement and by the Respondents’ RSU Agreements for 2020 and 2021-2023.

These are incorporated by reference into the employment agreement. In addition

to providing for a base salary and entitlement to a discretionary bonus, the

employment agreement provided that Dr. Wigdor would receive an initial grant of

43,380 RSUs and refresher grants (as outlined in the chart at para. 65 above). This

was set out in a letter enclosed with the employment agreement as follows:


             This letter is to confirm that your employer intends to
             recommend to the Board of Directors of Facebook, Inc.
             that you be granted restricted stock units (“RSUs”) by
                                      Page: 40


             Facebook, Inc. under the terms of the 2012 Equity
             Incentive Plan (as amended and restated on June 20,
             2016) (the “Plan”). Subject to the approval of Facebook,
             Inc. Board of Directors or committee thereof (the
             “Board”), you will be granted 43,380 RSUs under the
             Plan. [Emphasis in original.]

The letter went on to state that that Dr. Wigdor’s entitlement to RSUs was “subject

to and conditional upon”, inter alia, his “having previously entered into a contract

with [his] local employer”. It further provided: “Unlike traditional stock options, you

need not pay any exercise price for the Shares subject to the RSUs. They are

simply delivered to you following vesting (assuming the vesting conditions are

met).”

[102] This letter formed part of the employment agreement. Section 9 of the

employment agreements provides that “the Agreement and its enclosures contain

our entire understanding regarding your employment with the Company.”

[103] RSUs are governed by the 2012 Equity Incentive Plan (referenced in the

letter included as part of the employment agreement) with additional terms set out

in the RSU Agreements. As noted above, there are four RSU Agreements for

different time periods in this appeal: the 2020 RSU Agreement and the agreements

for each of 2021, 2022, and 2023.

[104] All RSUs vest in quarterly increments over a four-year span. RSUs have no

value until they vest. When they vest, the employee automatically receives the

corresponding number of common shares of Meta without having to pay for them
                                     Page: 41


(thus, as noted in the chart above at para. 65, the value of the RSUs on the vesting

date is based on the value of Meta common shares on that date).

[105] RSU grants are an element of employee compensation, according to one of

the Respondents’ affiants. They are intended to compensate employees for

continued service and to aid in employee retention over time. Meta’s 2023 Annual

Report describes the 2012 Equity Incentive Plan, which is the foundation for the

RSU entitlements, as a “share-based employee compensation plan”.

[106] Dr. Wigdor’s RSUs were taxed as employment income. His pay stubs listed

his income from vested RSUs as “RSU Taxable Benefit”.

[107] There can be no real doubt that Dr. Wigdor’s RSU entitlements were a “term

or condition” of his employment within the meaning of s. 60(1)(a) of the ESA.

Dr. Wigdor’s entitlement to the RSUs was outlined in the letter incorporated into

his employment agreement. The Respondents’ affiant agreed that RSU

entitlements were part of employee compensation. Meta’s 2023 Annual Report

describes the 2012 Equity Incentive Plan, which is the foundation for the RSU

entitlements, as a “share-based employee compensation plan”. During

Dr. Wigdor’s employment with the Respondents, his RSU entitlements vested

quarterly, in accordance with the RSU Agreements. The vested RSUs were treated

as taxable benefits in the Respondents’ records of payment to Dr. Wigdor.
                                      Page: 42


[108] Both the 2020 RSU Agreement and the 2021-2023 RSU Agreements

purport to alter an employee’s entitlement to RSUs in a manner that constitutes an

alteration of a term or condition of employment during the statutory notice period,

contrary to s. 60(1)(a) of the ESA.

[109] Both the 2020 RSU Agreement and the 2021-2023 RSU Agreements

provide that if an employee was terminated for any reason, “all unvested RSUs

shall be forfeited to the Company forthwith”, and all rights of the employee to RSUs

“shall immediately terminate.” In addition, each agreement has more specific

language that references notice periods. The 2020 RSU Agreement specifically

provides that:


            [N]o vesting shall continue during any notice period in
            relation to his/her Termination, whether specified under
            contract or statutorily, regulatory or common law.

The 2021-2023 RSU Agreements specifically provide:


            For the avoidance of doubt, unless explicitly required by
            applicable legislation, the date on which a Termination of
            Employment occurs and all unvested RSUs are forfeited
            will not be extended by any period during which notice,
            pay in lieu of notice or related payments or damages are
            provided or required to be provided under local law
            (including, without limitation, statute, contract, regulatory
            law, and/or common or civil law). [Emphasis added.]

[110] Returning to the analysis in Matthews, there is no dispute that, but for

Dr. Wigdor’s termination, 9,405 RSUs would have vested during the common law
                                    Page: 43


notice period, with a value of approximately US$4.7 million (calculated by the Meta

share price on vesting dates). The issue is whether under the second branch of

the Matthews test, the RSU Agreements, part of the employment agreement,

lawfully removed these rights or were contrary to the ESA and thus, could not

validly contract out of common law rights.

[111] The 2020 RSU Agreement unequivocally states that no vesting shall

continue during, inter alia, the statutory notice period. This is contrary to the

obligation on an employer in s. 60(1)(a) of the ESA not to alter “any term or

condition of employment” during the statutory notice period. It is thus void,

pursuant to s. 5(1) of the ESA, and cannot validly contract out of Dr. Wigdor’s

common law rights.

[112] The 2021-2023 RSU Agreements also purport to end vesting immediately

upon termination. Although the 2021-2023 RSU Agreements appear to attempt to

include a saving provision with the language “unless explicitly required by

applicable legislation”, there is nothing “explicit” in the ESA about continued

vesting of RSUs during the statutory notice period. The saving language is not

engaged.

[113] But even assuming, taken at its highest, the provision is ambiguous about

how explicit saving language in employment standards legislation needs to be, that

ambiguity must be resolved in favour of the employee. Thus, the 2021-2023
                                     Page: 44


RSU Agreements are also contrary to s. 60(1)(a) of the ESA because they purport

to alter a “term or condition of employment” during the statutory notice period. The

clauses are thus void, pursuant to s. 5(1) of the ESA, and do not contract out of

Dr. Wigdor’s common law rights.

[114] Because the RSU Agreements purport to alter a term or condition of

employment by denying terminated employees continued vesting of RSUs during

the statutory notice period, they are contrary to the ESA, void, and incapable of

contracting out of common law notice entitlements: Matthews at para. 76;

Machtinger, at pp. 1004.

[115] For these reasons, Dr. Wigdor was entitled to have the value of RSUs that

would have vested during the 10-month common law notice period included in his

damages for the common law right to reasonable notice. The damages award

should be increased by US$4,711,647.29.


    b.     The application judge erred in finding that the ESA did not apply
           at all to the RSU entitlements

[116] After holding that Dr. Wigdor was not entitled to damages for the RSUs that

would have vested during the common law notice period because only s. 61 of the

ESA applied and its provisions for pay in lieu of notice did not include a protection

against alteration of terms or conditions of employment during the notice period,

the application judge went on to find that Dr. Wigdor’s RSU entitlements were

governed by separate agreements, and thus, not subject to the ESA at all:
                                     Page: 45


             The Applicant’s RSU rights were governed by separate
             agreements that are not treated the same way as his
             rights under his employment contract: Mikelsteins v.
             Morrison Hershfield Limited, 2019 ONCA 515 at para 16.
             I agree with the Respondents that the Applicant’s
             contractual entitlements were independent of any relief
             he may have been entitled to receive under his
             employment agreement, the ESA, or the common law.

[117] Dr. Wigdor argues this was an error. Dr. Wigdor argues that this conclusion

is inconsistent with the balance of the application judge’s reasons, rests on a

misapprehension of the Respondents’ position below in relation to the 2021-2023

RSU entitlements, is contrary to the application provisions of the ESA and binding

authority of this court, and rests on a misreading of Mikelsteins.

[118] The Respondents concede that the application judge erred in reaching the

conclusion that the ESA did not apply to the 2021-2023 RSU entitlements. The

Respondents had argued before the application judge, and maintain on appeal,

that the 2020 RSU entitlements were part of the deal to purchase Chatham, and

thus not employment related. But the Respondents accepted, both in this court

and below, that the 2021-2023 RSU entitlements were employment compensation.

Thus, the Respondents accept that the application judge misapprehended their

argument, to the extent that she applied it to the 2021-2023 RSU entitlements.

However, the Respondents argue that the application judge’s misapprehension of

their position is not material because the 2021-2023 RSU Agreements are

compliant with the ESA. The Respondents maintain their position that the RSUs
                                     Page: 46


subject to the 2020 RSU Agreement were part of the purchase transaction of

Chatham and were not employment compensation, and thus not subject to the

ESA.

[119] I agree with Dr. Wigdor that the application judge erred in finding that his

RSU entitlements were not subject to the ESA. I begin by noting that the application

judge’s conclusion that Dr. Wigdor’s RSU entitlements were not subject to the ESA

appears inconsistent with her earlier finding that s. 61 of the ESA applied to the

RSU entitlements but that the terms of the RSU Agreements were not contrary to

s. 61 (based on her erroneous interpretation of ss. 60 and 61).

[120] Further, the application judge made three errors in reaching the conclusion

that the ESA did not apply to the RSU entitlements.

[121] First, as the Respondents concede, the application judge misapprehended

their argument by holding that the 2021-2023 RSU entitlements were not

employment compensation and not subject to the ESA. While the Respondents

argued before the application judge (and again on appeal) that the RSUs subject

to the 2020 RSU Agreement were not employment compensation, but rather were

part of the deal to purchase Chatham, they conceded that the RSUs subject to the

2021-2023 RSU Agreements were employment compensation subject to the ESA.

Instead, they took the position that the 2021-2023 RSU Agreements were

compliant with the ESA, a position I have considered and rejected above.
                                      Page: 47


[122] I address the 2020 RSU entitlements below. But as it relates to the 2021-

2023 RSU entitlements, I reject the Respondents’ position that the application

judge’s misapprehension of their position was not material. I have explained above

that the 2021-2023 RSU Agreements contravene ESA minimum standards. As

such, they are void and incapable of validly contracting out of Dr. Wigdor’s right to

common law reasonable notice, which includes damages for RSUs that would

have vested during the common law notice period.

[123] Second, the application judge’s conclusion that the ESA did not apply to

Dr. Wigdor’s RSU entitlements is contrary to the application provision of the ESA,

the record in this case, and authority of this court.

[124] Section 3 of the ESA provides (with certain exceptions that are not

applicable in this case) that:

             … the employment standards set out in this Act apply with respect to
             an employee and his employer if

                    (a) The employee’s work is to be performed in Ontario; or

                    (b) The employee’s work is to be performed in Ontario and
                    outside Ontario but the work performed outside Ontario is a
                    continuation of work performed in Ontario.

[125] This language speaks to the broad application of the ESA to employees who

perform work in Ontario. This is consistent with the ESA’s purpose as remedial

legislation, designed to extend its protections to “as many employees as possible”:

Machtinger, at p. 1003; Wood at para. 28.
                                    Page: 48


[126] The only reasonable conclusion on the record in this appeal is that

Dr. Wigdor’s RSU entitlements were part of his employment compensation. As I

have outlined above at paras. 107, 118-19, the employment agreement and the

RSU Agreements structure Dr. Wigdor’s RSU entitlements as employment

compensation. Further, the RSUs that vested during the time Dr. Wigdor was

employed by the Respondents were treated as employment income. Thus, the

ESA applies to the RSU entitlements.

[127] The Respondents’ submission that the ESA does not apply to the RSU

entitlements that were subject to the 2020 RSU Agreement amounts to an

argument that because the 2020 RSU entitlements are connected to the purchase

of Chatham, the ESA does not apply, despite the fact that the documents in relation

to Dr. Wigdor’s employment and RSU entitlements structure the RSUs as

employment compensation.

[128] This court rejected that argument in Groves. Groves involved circumstances

where a shareholder, officer, and director of a corporation sold his shares to

another corporation, resigned as an officer and director, and then became an

employee of the purchaser corporation. His employment was subsequently

terminated without cause. In the appeal in wrongful dismissal action, one of the

arguments made by the employer was that the summary judgment motion judge

erred by failing to interpret the employment contract in the context of the

commercial sale of the shares and that the principles from Wood – and the ESA –
                                      Page: 49


were not applicable because the circumstances involved a commercial

transaction. This court rejected the argument that the motion judge failed to

consider the full factual context. The court also rejected the argument that the ESA

did not apply, stating at para. 13:


             To the extent that UTS is advancing an argument that in
             the context of a commercial contract, the ESA provisions
             do not apply, we disagree. There is nothing in the ESA
             that indicates that it is inapplicable in employment
             relationships connected to commercial transactions.

[129] In this case, the parties chose to make the purchase of Chatham contingent

on Dr. Wigdor becoming an employee of the Respondents, and chose to structure

the purchase deal and the employment agreement with the RSU entitlements as

employment compensation for Dr. Wigdor. The choice to structure the RSU

entitlements as employment compensation, including the 2020 entitlements,

means the ESA applies. The Respondents must live with that choice.

[130] Third, the application judge’s reliance on Mikelsteins was misplaced.

[131] Mikelsteins is distinguishable from the circumstances of this appeal.

Mikelsteins concerned an “employee-owned engineering firm” that allowed certain

employees to purchase shares in the parent corporation using their own funds.

When an employee decided to purchase shares, their rights regarding the shares

were determined by the terms of the shareholders agreement. This court held that

receipt of shares was not employment compensation subject to the ESA for two
                                     Page: 50


reasons: (1) because the employee had to purchase the shares using their own

funds; and (2) because the employee’s rights as a shareholder in relation to the

shares, once the employee made the choice to purchase the shares, were

determined under the shareholders agreement, not the employment contract:

Mikelsteins v. Morrison Hershfield Limited, 2019 ONCA 515, at paras. 2-6, 12-19;

Mikelsteins v. Morrison Hershfield Limited, 2021 ONCA 155, at paras. 11-13, leave

to appeal refused, [2019] S.C.C.A. No. 363.

[132] By contrast, as I have outlined above, in this case the RSU entitlements

were a form of employment compensation that automatically vested in

consideration of ongoing employment.

[133] For these reasons, I conclude that the application judge erred in finding that

the ESA did not apply to the RSU entitlements. I have explained earlier in these

reasons why the RSU Agreements do not meet ESA minimum standards and are

not capable of validly contracting out of Dr. Wigdor’s common law right to

reasonable notice.


    c.    Did the application judge err in declining to award Dr. Wigdor
          punitive damages

[134] Dr. Wigdor argues that the application judge erred in declining to award

punitive damages. He argues that her findings amounted to a finding of a

deliberate breach of the ESA by the Respondents, seemingly in an effort to

pressure him into signing a release and/or as a reprisal for his refusal to do so.
                                       Page: 51


Dr. Wigdor further argues that punitive damages were particularly appropriate

given the size and sophistication of the Respondents, who, he argues, should be

expected to model compliance with employment standards.

[135] The Respondents argue that the application judge made no error in declining

to award punitive damages. The application judge found that the Respondents’

conduct “[fell] short of reprehensible conduct” and did not “rise to the level of ‘harsh’

or ‘malicious’.” She was entitled to exercise her discretion to make this finding,

which was rationally supported by the record and the case law.

[136] The application judge made the following findings in declining to award

punitive damages:


             I find that the circumstances suggest more than an
             unintentional administrative error but falling short of
             reprehensible conduct. The hearsay evidence filed by the
             Respondents with the “explanation” for the 10 month
             delay is inadequate and vague. The timing of the
             payment, coming after legal proceedings were
             commenced, leads me to infer that at the very least, the
             Respondents were prepared to let the Applicant’s
             entitlements languish. Clearly, they were interested in
             negotiating a release with him and to that extent he had
             their attention. Yet, they were curiously passive about
             seeing to his other statutory entitlements.

             Overall, I find that while dilatory, the conduct here does
             not rise to the level of “harsh” or “malicious”. I conclude
             that the Applicant has not established that he is entitled
             to punitive damages.
                                     Page: 52


[137] Punitive damages are restricted to “advertent wrongful acts that are so

malicious and outrageous that they are deserving of punishment on their own”:

Honda Canada Inc. v. Keays, 2008 SCC 39, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 362, at paras. 62 and

68.

[138] The application judge properly adverted to the high standard to award

punitive damages set out in Keays. While the application judge’s finding in relation

to the Respondents’ conduct in not paying the pay in lieu of notice for 10 months

– and not until the application was commenced – approaches a finding of

intentional misconduct, it is not such a finding. I am not persuaded that she made

any palpable and overriding error in her fact-finding on this issue.

[139] In light of the discretionary nature of the assessment of whether punitive

damages are appropriate, and given the nature of the application judge’s factual

findings on this issue, I see no reviewable error and no basis to intervene in her

decision not to award punitive damages.


E.    DISPOSITION

[140] I would allow the appeal, except with respect to punitive damages. I would

strike out paragraph 2 of the Amended Order of the application judge and vary the

order to increase Dr. Wigdor’s damages by US$4,711,647.29 to account for the

lost value of the RSUs that would have vested during the 10-month common law

reasonable notice period.
                                     Page: 53


[141] I would dismiss the cross-appeal.

[142] At the close of the hearing, the parties advised that they had an agreement

on costs of the appeal. However, the agreement was premised on one party being

successful on all issues. Because we did not allow the appeal with respect to the

denial of punitive damages, the agreement does not apply. Counsel were

optimistic that, if the result was mixed, they could reach another agreement on

costs of the appeal. We leave it to the parties to have that discussion, both in

relation to costs of the appeal and whether the result of the appeal has any impact

on the costs of the application.

[143] If the parties are unable to reach agreement on costs, they may file written

submissions limited to three pages, plus a costs outline. Dr. Wigdor’s submissions

shall be filed within 10 days of the release of these reasons. The Respondents’

submissions shall be filed within 10 days of the filing of Dr. Wigdor’s submissions.

There is no right of reply.

Released: August 7, 2026 “J.G.”

                                                                  “J. Copeland J.A.”
                                                           “I agree. J. George J.A.”
                                                          “I agree. S. Gomery J.A.”
