                   COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

                                CITATION: Kelava v. Spadacini, 2021 ONCA 428
                                                              DATE: 20210617
                                                            DOCKET: C68394

                         Benotto, Miller and Trotter JJ.A.

BETWEEN

           David Kelava and The United Brotherhood of Retail, Food,
               Industrial and Service Trades International Union

                                                             Defendants/Applicants
                                                                      (Appellants)

                                       and

                                 Dante Spadacini

                                                               Plaintiff/Respondent
                                                                       (Respondent)


Melvyn L. Solmon and Laney J. Paddock, for the appellants

Dante Spadacini, acting in person

Heard: April 21, 2021 by video conference

On appeal from the judgment of the Divisional Court (Justices Lynne Leitch, Harriet
E. Sachs and David L. Corbett), dated October 30, 2019, with reasons reported at
2019 ONSC 6314, affirming the order of Deputy Judge Thomas H. Clemenhagen,
dated June 21, 2018.

Benotto J.A.:

[1]   This appeal involves the jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court to appoint a

representative defendant for an unincorporated association.
                                      Page: 2


A.    FACTS

[2]   The respondent, Dante Spadacini, brought a wrongful termination claim in

Small Claims Court against the appellants David Kelava and The United

Brotherhood of Retail, Food, Industrial and Service Trades International Union

(“the Union”). The monetary amount of the claim is within the jurisdiction of the

Small Claims Court.

[3]   The Deputy Judge made an order amending the style of the action “to

change the wording of the defendant’s name slightly” by adding the named

defendant David Kelava as a representative of the Union. Although the Rules of

the Small Claims Court, O. Reg. 258/98 do not explicitly deal with representation

orders, the Deputy Judge applied r. 1.03(2) which gives the court discretion to refer

to the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, if a matter is not

adequately covered by the Small Claims Court Rules. The deputy judge then

referred to r. 12.07 of the Rules of Civil Procedure. This rule (typically used when

a union is sued) provides that one or more persons may be authorized by the court

to defend an action when numerous persons have the same interest.

[4]   The Union applied for judicial review to the Divisional Court on the basis that

the deputy judge lacked jurisdiction to make the order because there is a clear

omission in the Small Claim Court Rules preventing reference to the Rules of Civil

Procedure.
                                               Page: 3


[5]     The Divisional Court upheld the deputy judge’s order, unanimously ruling

that he did not err.

[6]     The Union now appeals to this court. 1

B.      POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

(1)     Appellants

[7]     The appellants submit that the Divisional Court erroneously expanded the

jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court. They say that there is a precondition to the

application of r. 1.03(2) and it was not met here. They submit that r. 1.03(2) can

only be applied in order to refer to the Rules of Civil Procedure if there is a “gap”

as opposed to an “omission” in the Small Claims Court Rules.

[8]     The appellants argue that there is an omission, not a gap, in the Small

Claims Court Rules and rely on this court’s decisions in Van de Vrande v.

Butkowski, 2010 ONCA 230, 99 O.R. (3d) 648, and Riddel v. Apple Canada Inc.,

2017 ONCA 590, 139 O.R. 595. They argue that a gap is something that is covered

inadequately by the Rules, whereas an omission is not addressed in the Rules at

all and consequently, there is no ability for the Small Claims Court to make

reference to r. 1.03(2) or to the Rules of Civil Procedure.




1 No submissions were made as to the standard of review. In any event, as I explain, the decision under

review is correct.
                                       Page: 4


[9]    The appellants further argue that the Small Claims Court does not have the

jurisdiction to hear actions by or against unincorporated associations. They rely on

the absence of reference to unincorporated associations in the Small Claims Court

Rules.

(2)    Respondent

[10]   The respondent submits that the Small Claims Court Rules are clear and

unambiguous in that the court may give directions and make orders when the rules

do not cover a matter adequately. This is exactly what the deputy judge did. He

identified an area where the rules did not adequately cover a matter – the ability to

make representation orders – and made reference to the Rules of Civil Procedure.

There are also Ontario regulations premised on unincorporated associations falling

under the jurisdiction of Small Claims Court. Specifically, Ontario Regulation

332/16 Small Claims Court – Fees and Allowance includes unincorporated

organizations in the definition of “claimant”.

[11]   The respondent points to several Small Claims Court actions commenced

by and against unincorporated associations, including unions: see Ryan v. PACI

Band Parents Association, [2003] O.J. No. 3732 (Sup. Ct. (Sm. Cl. Div.)); De

Yound v. Van Bart, [2006] O.J. No. 4491 (Sup. Ct. (Sm. Cl. Div.));

Communications, Energy and Paperworks Union of Canada, Local 593 v.

Matthews, [2006] O.J. No. 872 (Sup. Ct. (Sm. Cl. Div.)); Communications, Energy

and Paperworks Union of Canada, Local 593 v. Dennis Garratt (unreported); and
                                       Page: 5


Arnett v. Rail Canada Traffic Controllers, [1991] O.J. No. 2656 (Prov. Ct. Civ. Div.

Sm. Cl. Ct.)).

C.     ANALYSIS

[12]   Is the Small Claims Court prevented from naming a representative

defendant in an action against an unincorporated association?

[13]   I conclude that the answer is no.

[14]   I say this for these reasons: (i) the deputy judge had the authority under the

Small Claims Court Rules to make the order without reference to the Rules of Civil

Procedure; (ii) the deputy judge did not err by referring to the Rules of Civil

Procedure; and (iii) the legislature did not deliberately omit unincorporated

associations from the jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court.

The authority to make the order is in the Small Claims Court Rules

[15]   The Small Claims Court is a branch of the Superior Court of Justice. It

handles nearly half of the civil disputes in the province. The court is meant to

provide an efficient, cost-effective forum for the resolution of civil disputes involving

less than $35,000. It hears cases in a summary way and “may make such order

as is considered just and agreeable to good conscience”: The Courts of Justice

Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, s. 25.

[16]   In short, the court embodies the foundations of access to justice: informality,

affordability, timely resolution, accessibility for self-represented people and active
                                       Page: 6


judicial engagement. By providing access to justice, the court has an important role

in the administration of justice for the province.

[17]   The authority to make a representation order is found in the Small Claims

Court Rules.

[18]   The rules are to be read in their entire context having regard to their nature,

purpose, scheme, and object. The Small Claims Court Rules, read in their entirety,

emphasize facilitating access to justice. They begin with guidance as to their

interpretation. Rule 1.03(1) provides:

             These rules shall be liberally construed to secure the just, most
             expeditious and least expensive determination of every proceeding
             on its merits in accordance with section 25 of the Courts of Justice
             Act. O. Reg. 258/98, r. 1.03 (1). [Emphasis added.]

[19]   To further provide for the achievement of their objectives, the rules give

broad discretion to the court. If the rules do not directly address a matter, the court

may give directions and make “any order that is just”. In order to implement the

order, the practice is to be decided by analogy to the Small Claims Court Rules.

Then, “if the court considers it appropriate” the court may refer to the Rules of Civil

Procedure. Rule 1.03(2) provides:

             If these rules do not cover a matter adequately, the court may give
             directions and make any order that is just, and the practice shall be
             decided by analogy to these rules, by reference to the Courts of
             Justice Act and the Act governing the action and, if the court
             considers it appropriate, by reference to the Rules of Civil
             Procedure. O. Reg. 78/06, s. 3. [Emphasis added.]
                                      Page: 7


[20]   The Small Claims Court Rules provided the authority to make the order even

without reference to the Rules of Civil Procedure. I say this for several reasons.

[21]   First, pursuant to a plain reading of r. 1.03(2) the court may give directions

and make any order that is just. This provides the court with authority to manage

its own process.

[22]   Second, with respect to the pleadings, it has long been the case that a

liberal, non-technical approach should be taken to the pleadings in Small Claims

Court (Brighton Heating & Air Conditioning v. Savoia (2006), 79 O.R. (3d) 386 (Div.

Ct.), at para. 40). The court has the power to grant necessary amendments to

secure the just determination of the real matters in dispute. Rule 2 provides:

             2.01 A failure to comply with these rules is an irregularity and does
             not render a proceeding or a step, document or order in a proceeding
             a nullity, and the court may grant all necessary amendments or other
             relief, on such terms as are just, to secure the just determination of
             the real matters in dispute.

             2.02 If necessary in the interest of justice, the court may dispense with
             compliance with any rule at any time.

[23]   Third, if a matter is not adequately covered, the court is to decide the matter

“by analogy” to other Small Claims Court rules – the very rules that emphasize the

just, most expeditious and least expensive process. It is inconsistent with this

objective to require a litigant to endure the time, expense and delay of an

application to the Superior Court only to obtain a representation order when the

matter is within the monetary jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court.
                                      Page: 8


Reference to the Rules of Civil Procedure was not an error

[24]   The appellants submit that the Deputy Judge had no authority to apply r.

1.03(2) in order to refer to the Rules of Civil Procedure.

[25]   I disagree.

[26]   The Deputy Judge was not required to have reference to the procedure in r.

12 of the Rules of Civil Procedure at all. Reference to the Rules of Civil Procedure

is discretionary and was not necessary in this case.

[27]   Recall the wording of s. 1.03(2). If the matter is not adequately covered, the

court may give directions and, “if the court considers it appropriate,” do so with

reference to the Rules of Civil Procedure.

[28]   For these reasons, I conclude that the Small Claims Court Rules provide the

authority to make the order appealed from. That said, I turn to the appellants’

submissions with respect to the court’s jurisdiction.

Jurisdiction regarding unincorporated associations

[29]   The appellants say that nonetheless, the deputy judge could not make the

order at all, because the Small Claims Court has no jurisdiction with respect to

unincorporated associations. They submit that the legislative intent is evident from

the fact that the rules do not refer to unincorporated associations. This prevents

reference to the Rules of Civil Procedure which can only be used where there is a

gap as opposed to an omission in the Small Claims Court Rules.
                                     Page: 9


[30]   The appellants rely on this court’s decisions in Van de Vrande and Riddel

which, they submit, have developed the test to apply when the Small Claims Court

decides a practice following the Rules of Civil Procedure. That test is to determine

whether there is a “gap” or an “omission” in the Small Claims Court Rules. If the

former, the court can have reference to the Rules of Civil Procedure. If the latter,

then the legislature must have intended there to be no jurisdiction.

[31]   The appellants misconstrue both Van de Vrande and Riddel.

[32]   In Van de Vrande, this court held that motions for summary judgment based

on principles emanating from r. 20 of the Rules of Civil Procedure are not available

under the Small Claims Court Rules, in part because the Small Claims Court Rules

allow a process whereby a claim could be struck. Consequently, the omission of

the summary judgment rule was an omission not a gap. Importantly, this court read

the Small Claims Court Rules liberally and upheld the deputy judge’s order

dismissing the claim. Van de Vrande actually confirms my view that it was not

necessary to invoke the Rules of Civil Procedure at all because the court had the

authority to give directions.

[33]   Nor does Riddell assist the appellants.

[34]   Riddel, at para. 7, clarifies that when there is a “marker in the Rules of a

deliberate legislative decision to omit” a procedure, then the Small Claims Court

Rules should not be supplemented. Riddel found no such marker when the court

ordered an inspection of property. Rather the court concluded that the Small
                                               Page: 10


Claims Court Rules authorized the impugned order without reference to the Rules

of Civil Procedure.

[35]    An example of a marker limiting jurisdiction is shown in Bruyea v. Canada

(Veteran Affairs), 2019 ONCA 599, 147 O.R. (3d) 84. There, the issue was whether

the Small Claims Court had the authority to dismiss an action under s. 137.1 of the

Courts of Justice Act. This is the so-called anti-SLAPP2 law. It is meant to address

concerns arising from the use of litigation to interfere with freedom of expression

and quickly dismiss unmeritorious claims that unduly encroach on an individual’s

right to freedom of expression on matters of public interest: Bruyea, at para. 11.

The process permits the summary dismissal of an action. In Bruyea, this court

determined that, by drafting the Act to refer exclusively to “judge”, not “deputy

judge” or “court”, the legislature put down a “marker” of an intent to omit the

jurisdiction from the Small Claims Court. Interestingly, the court commented on

access to justice, at para. 27, by noting that:

                …ironically, s. 137.1 is not a provision providing access.
                To the contrary, at least viewed from the perspective of
                the plaintiff, it is the very opposite. It is a provision that is
                intended, in proper circumstances, to prohibit access to
                the courts.

[36]    Here, there is no such marker. There is no language in a statute that marks

a clear intent to exclude representative defendants from the court’s jurisdiction. On




2 Strategic Lawsuits Against Public Participation
                                       Page: 11


the contrary, there is extensive language regarding the ability of the court to

manage its process in a cost-effective way.

[37]   Finally, I note the appellant appears to have conflated the right to sue with

the representation order. The appellant submits that unincorporated associations

do not have legal personality. This is incorrect for trade unions. A trade union is a

legal entity with legal personality: see Berry v. Pulley, 2002 SCC 40, [2002] 2

S.C.R. 493, at para. 39. However, because of the statutory requirements in the

Rights of Labour Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. R.33, the only way to sue a union in Ontario

is to obtain a representation order: Lawrence v. IBEW, Local 773, 2017 ONCA

321, 138 O.R. (3d) 129, at para. 16.

D.     CONCLUSION

[38]   I would dismiss the appeal with costs payable to the respondent fixed in the

amount of $5,000 for the appeal, plus $2,000 for the motion for leave to appeal for

a total of $7,000 inclusive of tax and disbursements.

Released: June 17, 2021 “M.L.B.”
                                                                 “M.L. Benotto J.A.”
                                                           “I agree B.W. Miller J.A.”
                                                         “I agree Gary Trotter J.A.”
