                    COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

      CITATION: Spirleanu v. Transglobe Property Management Service Ltd., 2015
                                                                   ONCA 187
                                                             DATE: 20150318
                                                           DOCKET: C59261

                           Cronk, Gillese and Brown JJ.A.

BETWEEN

                                    Ilie Spirleanu

                                                                          Appellant

                                        and

                   Transglobe Property Management Service Ltd.

                                                                       Respondent



Ilie Spirleanu, acting in person

Martin P. Zarnett, for the respondent

Heard: March 13, 2015

On appeal from the judgment of Justice Andra Pollak of the Superior Court of
Justice, dated August 1, 2014.




                                   ENDORSEMENT




[1]     The appellant, Ilie Spirleanu, appeals from the order of the Pollak J. dated

August 1, 2014, which granted summary judgment dismissing his action against
                                      Page: 2


the defendant, Transglobe Property Management Services Ltd., and awarded

costs of $5,100 in favor of Transglobe.

[2]   Mr. Spirleanu moves for leave to file fresh evidence on this appeal. The

materials he seeks leave to file consist of three sets of documents: (i) the

Landlord and Tenant Board file for application TNL-21855, (ii) the file of the

Sheriff’s Office dealing with the eviction of Mr. Spirleanu from his residential unit

in October, 2010, pursuant to the eviction order granted by the Landlord and

Tenant Board, and (iii) miscellaneous correspondence and photographs. Those

materials do not meet the criteria for the admission of fresh evidence set out in R.

v. Palmer, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 759, at p. 775. Specifically, all of the materials were

available to Mr. Spirleanu to file as part of his responding materials before the

judge on the summary judgment motion. Consequently, we do not grant his

motion for leave to file fresh evidence.

[3]   Turning to the merits of the appeal, we see no error in the order of the

motion judge.

[4]   Mr. Spirleanu’s statement of claim alleged that Transglobe had unlawfully

evicted him from residential rental premises on October 15, 2010. The eviction

had been made pursuant to a May 5, 2009 order of the Landlord and Tenant

Board, an appeal from which had been dismissed by the Divisional Court for

failure to perfect in time. The Divisional Court also dismissed the motion by Mr.
                                     Page: 3


Spirleanu for leave to extend the time to perfect his appeal and for an order for

re-entry into the premises.

[5]   On September 7, 2012, Mr. Spirleanu commenced an action in the Small

Claims Court against Transglobe seeking virtually the same relief as that sought

in this action. The Small Claims Court dismissed his claim against Transglobe on

November 29, 2013.

[6]   Accordingly, the present action was an attempt by Mr. Spirleanu to re-

litigate issues previously decided against him by the Landlord and Tenant Board,

Divisional Court and Small Claims Court.        As well, the allegations of Mr.

Spirleanu solely concerned his residential tenancy agreement with Transglobe

and the disposition of his possessions in the unit following his eviction. As such,

the motion judge was correct in concluding that their adjudication lay within the

exclusive jurisdiction of the Landlord and Tenant Board.

[7]   While Mr. Spirleanu argues that the motion judge did not consider his

evidence, we do not agree. The motion judge applied to the evidence the legal

principles the law required her to consider. We see no unfairness in the hearing

conducted by the motion judge.

[8]   The motion judge did not err in granting Transglobe summary judgment

dismissing Mr. Spirleanu’s action. We therefore dismiss Mr. Spirleanu’s appeal
                                   Page: 4


and order him to pay Transglobe its costs of the appeal fixed in the amount of

$1,000, inclusive of disbursements and H.S.T.




                                          “E.A. Cronk J.A.”
                                          “E.E. Gillese J.A.”
                                          “David Brown J.A.”
