                    COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

                        CITATION: Holland v. Hostopia.com Inc., 2015 ONCA 762
                                                               DATE: 20151110
                                                             DOCKET: C56448

                    Strathy C.J.O., LaForme and Tulloch JJ.A.

BETWEEN

                                   Sean Holland

                                                                Plaintiff/Appellant

                                        and

                                Hostopia.Com Inc.

                                                          Defendant/Respondent

Craig Colraine and Chris Kalantzis, for the appellant

George Avraam and Jeremy Hann, for the respondent

Heard: May 14, 2015

On appeal from the judgment of Justice John MacDonald of the Superior Court of
Justice, dated December 7, 2012.

Strathy C.J.O.:

A.    INTRODUCTION


[1]   The appellant accepted a written offer of employment, which contained a

statement that he would be required to sign an employment agreement. He

started work.     Nine months later, he was presented with an employment
                                     Page: 2


agreement, which he signed. That agreement provided for termination by notice

under the Employment Standards Act, 2000, S.O. 2000, c. 41 (“ESA”).


[2]   His employment was terminated without cause seven years later. The

employer paid him an amount that was at least equal to his ESA entitlement. The

trial judge dismissed his action for wrongful dismissal, holding that his damages

were limited to the minimum amounts set out in the ESA.


[3]   These reasons explain why, in my view, his damages were not confined to

the ESA amounts and he was entitled to common law reasonable notice or

damages in lieu. While I would allow the appeal in part on this basis, I do not

accept the appellant’s submissions that the trial judge erred in rejecting some of

his claims for commissions.

B.    THE FACTS


[4]   The appellant was hired by the respondent as a National Account

Manager, a sales position, pursuant to an offer of employment contained in a

two-page letter dated May 13, 2003 (the “Offer Letter”).


[5]   The Offer Letter described the essential terms of employment, including

salary ($75,000 per year), commissions, benefits and vacation. The offer could

be accepted by returning a signed copy of the letter and “the subsequent signing

of an employment agreement.”
                                      Page: 3


[6]    The letter said nothing about the appellant’s entitlement to notice of

termination. Nor did it contain details of his commissions.


[7]    The appellant signed the letter, indicating his acceptance of the offer, on

June 9, 2003.


[8]    On the same date, the appellant signed a Code of Business Conduct and a

Proprietary Rights Agreement. The latter contained a 6-month non-competition

provision and a 12-month non-solicitation provision. Neither document dealt with

termination or notice periods.


[9]    Some nine months later, the appellant was presented with a six-page

Employment Agreement, dated February 18, 2004, which he signed on March 8,

2004 (the “Employment Agreement”).


[10]   The Employment Agreement recited that the respondent had agreed to

employ the appellant subject to the terms and conditions set out therein. The

operative provisions were preceded by a recital that the agreement was made “in

consideration of the Employee’s employment by Hostopia and the compensation

paid to the Employee from time to time while so employed”.


[11]   Much of the Employment Agreement was boilerplate. The contentious

provision is clause 4.3, which allowed the respondent to terminate the appellant
                                       Page: 4


without cause or notice, provided it paid him in lieu of notice in accordance with

the ESA.


[12]   The Employment Agreement had two express terms that varied the terms

of the two documents signed along with the Offer Letter. Those new terms

doubled the non-competition period to one year and the non-solicitation period to

two years.


[13]   In the Employment Agreement, the appellant acknowledged that he had

read the agreement, understood its terms, was under no duress and knew he

had the right to obtain independent legal advice and had either obtained such

advice or waived it.


[14]   In addition to the Offer Letter and the Employment Agreement, the

appellant signed a series of annual commission plans. The validity of these

agreements is acknowledged, but their interpretation is at issue. At the time of

the termination of his employment, the appellant’s commission entitlement was

governed     by   a    Non-Salary   Compensation   Memorandum.    It   set   out   the

commissions to which he was entitled if he attained certain sales figures.


[15]   The appellant was entitled to a “Strategic Account Bonus” if one of his new

accounts generated more than a defined revenue threshold for more than three

consecutive months. This bonus was payable only if the appellant was an
                                        Page: 5


“employee in good standing” at the time he claimed it. As well, he was entitled to

commissions on revenue that was “booked” by the respondent on his accounts.

Details of these commissions are set out below.


[16]   The   appellant’s   employment    was   terminated   by   the   respondent on

February 28, 2010, nearly seven years after he was hired. At the time of

termination, he had been working on finalizing an agreement with a potential new

customer, “EarthLink”. The customer had not been signed up as a new account

at the time of his termination. Subsequently, the customer signed a non-binding

letter of intent in July 2010 and a formal contract on October 15, 2010, effective

October 1, 2010.


[17]   On termination, the appellant was paid accrued vacation pay, commissions

for the months of January through March 2010, and the sum of $40,756.81 for

“payments in lieu of notice.” The calculation of the latter amount is not entirely

clear on the evidence. It was agreed at trial that it was at least the amount of his

ESA entitlement to severance and termination pay.


[18]   About three months after his termination, the appellant found a new

position, with similar terms of employment, including the same salary and a

commission program. He did not receive commissions until some time after he

began the new job.
                                      Page: 6


[19]   He sued the respondent,       claiming damages for       wrongful dismissal,

including the loss of the commissions he said he was owed on the EarthLink

contract. The trial judge dismissed his action in its entirety. I turn to his reasons

for doing so.

C.     THE TRIAL JUDGE’S REASONS


[20]   There were two key issues at trial. The first was whether the appellant was

bound by the term of the Employment Agreement regarding notice of termination.

Was he limited to his rights under the ESA or was he entitled to reasonable

notice at common law or damages in lieu? The resolution of this issue would

impact his entitlement to commissions earned during the notice period.


[21]   The second key issue was his entitlement to commissions on sales he was

working on at the time of his termination, including in particular the EarthLink

deal. There was conflicting evidence about the appellant’s contribution to

securing the EarthLink account.


[22]   The key witnesses at trial were the appellant and his former supervisor

(who had since left the respondent’s employ) on the one hand, and the

respondent’s former CEO on the other hand. The trial judge preferred the

evidence of the latter. He described him as the most credible and persuasive

witness, who had no interest in the outcome of the case and whose evidence,

unlike the appellant’s, was generally consistent with the documentary evidence.
                                       Page: 7


[23]   The trial judge rejected the appellant’s argument that the Employment

Agreement was void for lack of fresh consideration because he was already

bound by the employment agreement contained in the Offer Letter. He found that

the two agreements were interrelated and together constituted a single contract

of employment. There was consideration for the contract as a whole, which had

contemplated the acceptance process to which the plaintiff had agreed. The two

agreements were consistent and one did not negate the other. The appellant

admitted he had signed the second agreement after quickly reading it. The trial

judge inferred that he did so because he knew that the Employment Agreement

was the second part of his acceptance of the offer of employment, a process to

which he had agreed when he signed and returned the Offer Letter. He made no

attempt to clarify anything in the document, did not object to any part of it, and

simply signed it.


[24]   The trial judge distinguished this court’s decision in Hobbs v. TDI Canada

Ltd. (2004), 246 DLR (4th) 43. There, this court found there was no consideration

for an agreement entered into after the commencement of employment, when the

employee had already accepted employment based on an offer letter. Unlike this

case, the trial judge said, in Hobbs the offer had not been presented to the

employee as “the introductory part of the more extensive contract of employment

that was to follow at a later date.” Nor was there anything in the offer letter in that
                                     Page: 8


case suggesting that the employee would be required to sign another document

that would form part of the agreement.


[25]   The trial judge found the facts of this case were different from Hobbs.

Here, the Offer Letter was presented to the appellant as the introductory part of

the more extensive contract of employment, with another part to be signed

subsequently. Further, he held, both documents are consistent. One does not

negate the other.


[26]   He concluded:

             The result is, I find, that there was valid consideration
             for both parts of the one contract of employment. Stated
             differently, consideration for the contract as a whole is
             proven by reason of the communicated and agreed
             acceptance process, which led to two closely
             interrelated documents comprising one contract of
             employment.

[27]   The trial judge accepted the respondent’s evidence that the appellant was

terminated for poor sales performance and for no other reason. He rejected the

appellant’s assertion that the respondent terminated him to avoid paying the

EarthLink commission. He found that there was no deal with EarthLink at the

time of the appellant’s termination and it would be many months before a deal

was finalized.


[28]   Much of the evidence at trial centred on the issue of whether the appellant

had secured the EarthLink contract before the termination of his employment and
                                          Page: 9


how much he had been responsible for securing the deal. The trial judge found

against the appellant on this critical issue. Not only was there no documentary

evidence of an agreement being in place at the time of his termination, the

evidence was inconsistent with that claim.            Following his termination,        the

appellant attempted to negotiate an agreement with the respondent to permit him

to continue to work on the EarthLink deal. As he said in an email to the

respondent after his termination, he would “hate to lose this deal knowing [he

could] get it back on track.” This conduct was inconsistent with his assertion that

there was a “done deal” at the time.


[29]     The trial judge found that the appellant’s contribution to the EarthLink deal

was limited. He did not find the opportunity, he worked together with a large team

on the deal, and much of the critical work to secure the account was done after

he was terminated. The appellant’s work probably contributed no more than 15

percent to the outcome and this occurred during the preliminary stages of a

protracted process.


[30]     Having found that the Offer Letter and the Employment Agreement were

part of one contract, the trial judge found that the termination provision of the

latter   was   sufficiently   clear.   Employers    may   referentially   incorporate   the

provisions of the ESA into an employment contract: Machtinger v. HOJ Industries

Ltd., [1992] 1 SCR 986.
                                         Page: 10


[31]    The parties agreed that if the ESA was applicable, the appellant was

entitled to 12.67 weeks of base salary and commissions. The trial judge found

that the amount paid by the respondent on termination was at least as much as

he     was   entitled   to.   Accordingly,   having   found   the   termination   provision

enforceable, and the appellant having been paid at least as much as he was

entitled to, he dismissed the action.


[32]    For the sake of completeness, the trial judge stated his conclusions on the

other issues. I will discuss those conclusions later in these reasons. For now, the

following summary will suffice.


[33]    First, but for the termination provisions of the Employment Agreement, the

appellant would have been entitled to damages for the period of reasonable

notice, based on all aspects of his compensation package, including the loss of

commission entitlement. He found that reasonable notice was eight months,

bearing in mind the factors from Bardal v. Globe and Mail, [1960] O.W.N. 253

(H.C.), the speed with which the appellant obtained equivalent employment, and

that there was a gap in respect of commission earnings at the new employer.


[34]    Second,    the terms of the commission plan precluded a claim for

commissions on the EarthLink account because the contract was signed after the

termination of the appellant’s employment, the revenues from the account were
                                     Page: 11


not “booked” until after the expiry of the notice period and the appellant was not

an “employee in good standing” when he claimed the commissions.


[35]   Third, although the appellant would not be entitled to commissions for

EarthLink, he would have been entitled to all aspects of his compensation

package, including commissions booked in respect of other transactions during

that period, but for the termination provision in the Employment Agreement.


[36]   Fourth, the appellant was not entitled to damages based on unjust

enrichment. The appellant suffered no deprivation because he received salary for

the work he did on the EarthLink account. In any event, the combination of the

termination provision in the Employment Agreement and the Commission Plan

were juristic reasons for the enrichment.


[37]   Fifth, and finally, if the termination provision did not apply, damages based

on eight months’ notice would be calculated as the salary, commissions and

bonuses he would have received in that time, less the amounts paid by the

respondent on termination and the earnings from his new employer during that

period.

D. THE ISSUES


[38]   The issues necessary to the determination of this appeal, and as framed

by the appellant, are as follows:
                                     Page: 12


                 1) the enforceability of the termination provision in the
                       Employment Agreement;
                 2) reasonable notice;
                 3) the appellant’s entitlement to commissions;
                 4) the appellant’s entitlement to compensation based on unjust
                       enrichment; and
                 5) damages.

[39]   Before addressing those issues, it is appropriate to consider the applicable

standards of review.

E.     THE STANDARDS OF REVIEW


[40]   The standard of review is particularly important because of the trial judge’s

significant findings of fact and his interpretation of the contract. There are, in my

view, three applicable standards of review.


[41]   First, the issue of the enforceability of the Employment Agreement – an

issue of contract formation – is reviewable on a standard of correctness as to

questions of law and “palpable and overriding error” for questions of fact: Sattva

Capital Corp. v. Creston Moly Corp., 2014 SCC 53, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 633; Housen

v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235.


[42]   Second, the appellant’s entitlement to commissions is a question of

contract interpretation. In Sattva, at para. 50, the Supreme Court established that

contractual interpretation is reviewed by appellate courts as a mixed question of
                                      Page: 13


fact and law: see also Housen. Absent an extricable error of law, a trial judge’s

interpretation of the contract attracts deference, as it requires a court to apply the

principles of contractual interpretation to the words of the contract, in the context

of the factual matrix.


[43]   The appellant’s entitlement to commissions involved issues of mixed fact

and law and is subject to review for palpable and overriding error, unless the trial

judge made an extricable error in law, in which case the standard of review is

correctness: Sattva; Housen. An extricable legal error in this context includes

“the application of an incorrect principle, the failure to consider a required

element of a legal test, or the failure to consider a relevant factor”: Sattva, at

para. 53, referring to King v. Operating Engineers Training Institute of Manitoba

Inc., 2011 MBCA 80, 270 Man. R. (2d) 63, at para. 20. As the Supreme Court

cautioned in Sattva, at para. 54, an appellate court should not strive to find

extricable legal errors in what are essentially factual disputes over the objective

intention of the parties.


[44]   Third, a trial judge’s determination of reasonable notice in a wrongful

dismissal case is entitled to deference. As this court observed in Minott v. Tam

O’Shanter Development Co. (1999), 42 O.R. (3d) 321 at pp. 343-344:

             Determining the period of reasonable notice is an art not
             a science. In each case trial judges must weigh and
             balance a catalogue of relevant factors. No two cases
             are identical; and, ordinarily there is no one “right” figure
                                       Page: 14


             for reasonable notice. Instead, most cases yield a range
             of     reasonableness.   Therefore,    a    trial   judge’s
             determination of the period of reasonable notice is
             entitled to deference from an appellate court. An appeal
             court is not justified in interfering unless the figure
             arrived at by the trial judge is outside an acceptable
             range or unless, in arriving at the figure, the trial judge
             erred in principle or made an unreasonable finding of
             fact. If the trial judge erred in principle, an appellate
             court may substitute its own figure. But it should do so
             sparingly if the trial judge’s award is within an
             acceptable range, despite the error in principle.

[45]   The rule that the court should interfere sparingly on the issue of

reasonable notice, even in the presence of an error in principle, has been applied

by this court in McNevan v. AmeriCredit Corp., 2008 ONCA 846, 94 O.R. (3d)

458.


[46]   Against that background, I turn to the issues raised by the appellant.

F.     ANALYSIS

(1) The enforceability of the Employment Agreement


[47]   I turn first to the issue whether the termination provision in the Employment

Agreement was enforceable, given that it was signed nine months after the

appellant commenced employment pursuant to the Offer Letter, which said

nothing about notice of termination.
                                     Page: 15


[48]   As I have noted, the trial judge considered this court’s decision in Hobbs,

but found it distinguishable because here there was consideration for a single

contract made up from two closely related and consistent documents.


[49]   With respect, the two documents were not consistent. They differed in at

least one very material respect. Once accepted, the Offer Letter constituted a

complete contract of employment. The appellant was employed pursuant to the

Offer Letter for some nine months before he signed the Employment Agreement.

It was an implied term of the Offer Letter that he was entitled to reasonable

notice prior to the termination of his employment: Francis v. Canadian Imperial

Bank of Commerce (1994), 21 O.R. (3d) 75 (C.A.). As the Supreme Court of

Canada observed in BG Checo International Ltd. v. British Columbia Hydro &

Power Authority, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 12, at p. 31, “[t]he law has always treated

express and implied terms as being equivalent in effect.”


[50]   The Employment Agreement contained an inconsistent term. Instead of

providing for reasonable notice, it limited the appellant’s entitlement to notice of

termination to the statutory minimum set out in the ESA. There was no evidence

of any discussion of the subject prior to the appellant’s acceptance of the Offer

Letter, no evidence that he was told that the Employment Agreement would

contain terms inconsistent with the Offer Letter and no evidence that he agreed

to waive his right to reasonable notice of termination when he signed the Offer
                                      Page: 16


Letter. Accordingly, the Employment Agreement introduced a new, very material

term, into the existing contract of employment – a term to which the appellant

had not previously consented and for which he received no consideration.


[51]   The common law entitlement to reasonable notice of termination has been

described by     the Supreme Court as a “necessary consideration” of an

employment relationship: Machtinger, at p. 1024. This court has described an

express   term contradicting     an   implied   term of    reasonable notice as a

“tremendously significant modification”: Francis, at p. 84; see also Braiden v. La-

Z-Boy Canada Ltd., 2008 ONCA 464, 294, D.L.R. (4th) 172, at paras. 48, 57.


[52]   It is well-settled that a promise to perform an existing contract is not

consideration: see e.g. K.M.A. Caterers Ltd. v. Howie, [1969] 1 O.R. 131 (C.A.);

Hobbs; Braiden. Fresh consideration was required: Francis.


[53]   In my view, the law in this respect is a matter of simple fairness. It is also a

matter of sound employment practice. As Juriansz J.A. noted in Hobbs, at para.

1:

             Accepting an offer of employment and committing the
             next stage of one’s career to a new employer is an
             important life decision that most people make carefully.
             Instability in an individual’s life, and in the workforce
             generally, is minimized when the decision is made on
             the basis of complete and accurate information about
             the new position.
                                      Page: 17


[54]   Juriansz J.A. noted the importance of fresh consideration where an

employer seeks to amend the employment agreement. He stated, at para. 42:

             The requirement of consideration to support an
             amended agreement is especially important in the
             employment context where, generally, there is inequality
             in    bargaining    power    between   employees    and
             employers. Some employees may enjoy a measure of
             bargaining power when negotiating the terms of
             prospective employment, but once they have been hired
             and are dependent on the remuneration of the new job,
             they become more vulnerable. The law recognizes this
             vulnerability, and the courts should be careful to apply
             Maguire [v. Northland Drug. Co, [1935] S.C.R. 32] and
             Techniform Products [v. Wolder (2001), 56 O.R. (3d) 1
             (C.A.)] only when, on the facts of the case, the
             employee gains increased security of employment, or
             other consideration, for agreeing to the new terms of
             employment.

[55]   Without   fresh   consideration,   the   Employment   Agreement   could   not

displace the implied term of reasonable notice contained in the Offer Letter. The

result is that the appellant was entitled to reasonable notice of termination at

common law. This impacts, potentially, his damages in lieu of notice and his

entitlement to commissions that became payable after his termination.

(2) Reasonable Notice


[56]   The trial judge found that, had the Employment Agreement not applied, the

appellant would have been entitled to eight months’ notice, having regard to the

Bardal factors, the speed with which he found comparable employment and the

delay before he was able to generate commissions at his new job.
                                      Page: 18


[57]   This issue is significant, not to the damages for loss of salary, which were

addressed through the ESA payments and the appellant’s own mitigation efforts,

but for lost commission earnings, which took time for the appellant to generate at

his new job.


[58]   The appellant argues that the trial judge erred in principle by failing to give

consideration to the non-competition and non-solicitation provisions of his

employment contract. He says that, on a proper analysis, reasonable notice

should have been 12 months. He relies on Prozak v. Bell Telephone Co. of

Canada, (1984), 46 O.R. (2d) 385 (C.A.); Kaufman v. Weston (1996), 18

C.C.E.L. (2d) 198 (Ont. S.C.); and Sharpe v. Computer Innovations Distribution

(1994), 146 N.B.R. (3d) 254 (C.A.).


[59]   The appellant refers to John R. Sproat, Wrongful Dismissal Handbook, 5th

ed. (Toronto: Carswell, 2009), at pp. 6.34.8-6.34.9, to support the submission

that a restrictive covenant may increase the reasonable notice period. The

learned author cites two cases of this court in which non-competition covenants

increased the notice period: Murrell v. Burns International Security Services Ltd.

(1997), 33 C.C.E.L. (2d) 1 and Ryan v. Laidlaw Transportation Ltd. (1995), 26

O.R. (3d) 97, per McKinlay J.A. (dissenting, but not on this point).


[60]   In both of those cases though, the non-competition provisions made it

more difficult for the employee to find comparable employment. There was no
                                     Page: 19


evidence in this case that the non-competition provisions were likely to make it

more difficult for the appellant to find comparable employment. I see no error in

principle in the trial judge’s failure to consider the impact of the non-competition

covenants.


[61]   There is, however, merit to the appellant’s submission that the trial judge

should not have considered the speed with which he found new employment in

determining the period of reasonable notice. Notice is to be determined by the

circumstances existing at the time of termination and not by the amount of time

that it takes the employee to find employment: see Panimondo v. Shorewood

Packaging Corp. (2009), 73 C.C.E.L. (3d) 99 (S.C.), citing Harper v. Bank of

Montreal (1989), 27 C.C.E.L. 54 (Ont. Div. Ct.). If two employees in identical

circumstances are terminated at the same time, they are entitled to the same

notice, regardless how long it takes each of them to find a new job. One may

mitigate her damages by finding a comparable job shortly after being dismissed.

The other may be unable to find work for years. They are entitled to the same

notice, regardless of the outcome. The time it takes to find a new job goes to

mitigation of damages, not to the length of notice.


[62]   I am unable to find, however, that the trial judge’s consideration of this

factor had a significant impact on his conclusion concerning the proper notice

period.   Having regard to the authorities cited by counsel for the appellant, the
                                      Page: 20


appropriate range in this case was between eight and twelve months. While the

eight months awarded by the trial judge was at the very low end of the range, I

would not interfere with the exercise of his discretion, notwithstanding the error in

referring to the time it took the appellant to find new work: See McNevan v.

AmeriCredit Corp., at paras. 34-35.

(3) Entitlement to commissions


[63]   The respondent’s Commission Plan, which appears to have been re-

issued and amended annually, was three pages long and covered six different

commissions or bonuses. It was not disputed that the plan itself was valid and

there was consideration for it.


[64]   The plan had “General Terms”, apparently applicable to all forms of

commission remuneration as well as specific terms applicable to each particular

form. Some terms were defined and some were not. Its language could only be

fully understood by someone who was familiar with the respondent’s business. It

is clear from his reasons that the trial judge found the language challenging.


[65]   That said, as the trial judge observed, the Commission Plan was “written in

the language of the defendant’s business for use between an employer and its

employee”. The trial judge had the benefit of hearing evidence about how the

Commission Plan worked in practice. His detailed analysis and interpretation of

the Commission Plan was informed by the factual matrix developed by the
                                    Page: 21


witnesses on both sides and the historical application of the plan in the course of

the appellant’s employment.


[66]   There are three commissions relevant to the EarthLink account. I will begin

by describing each commission and will summarize the trial judge’s reasons for

dismissing the appellant’s claims for these commissions. Under the heading

“Analysis”, I will explain why the trial judge’s interpretation of the Commission

Plan contains no extricable error of law and why I would defer to that

interpretation.

Strategic Account Bonus

[67]   The first commission is the Strategic Account Bonus. This was a bonus

payable on billings for new accounts that were identified as “strategic accounts”.

EarthLink was a strategic account. The 2010 Commission Plan provided that,

among other things, the appellant was entitled to a bonus, of up to $14,000, for

new accounts with billings of no less than $10,000 per month for at least three

consecutive months. In order to be paid a bonus, the respondent had to collect

the revenue, as opposed to simply invoicing it. The commissions could be

claimed by an employee up to 18 months from the time of signing the account,

provided the employee was in “good standing” at the time.


[68]   The trial judge found that the appellant was not entitled to the Strategic

Account Bonus for EarthLink. This was because he was not an employee in good
                                       Page: 22


standing when EarthLink billings commenced in March 2011 and had not proved

that he had claimed the bonus within 18 months of the account being signed.

Variable Compensation Commission

[69]      The second commission, the “Variable Compensation (Commission)”, was

payable based on an employee’s attainment of a revenue quota. If the appellant

reached 100 percent of his quota ($600,000 in 2010) he was entitled to 16

percent of that revenue. The provisions applicable to this form of commission

stated,     “Commissions are paid on a booked basis, with adjustments as

necessary for credits, charge-backs and other net amounts.”


[70]      The trial judge found he was not entitled to this commission for EarthLink

because the EarthLink revenues were not booked and adjusted until March 2011,

over a year after his termination and outside the reasonable notice period.

Minimum Monthly Revenue Bonus

[71]      The third commission was described as a “Minimum Monthly Revenue

Bonus”. The Commission Plan described the entitlement to this “bonus” as

follows: “Effective for 2012, any contract with a minimum monthly recurring

revenue fee shall earn the sales representative a front-end commission payment

equivalent to 100 percent of the 3rd month’s consecutive billing – to a maximum

of $20,000.” This commission, like all commissions, was subject to the “General

Terms” of the Commission Plan, which provided, among other things, that the
                                      Page: 23


“Employee must be employed in good standing by Hostopia to collect any trailing

bonus     amounts,   which   means    that   no   trailing   bonus   survive   employee

termination for any cause.” It also provided, “Any bonus amounts earned up to

termination of employment must be paid within 30 days of termination date.”


[72]    The trial judge found that there was no Minimum Monthly Revenue Bonus

payable to the appellant because there was no minimum monthly recurring

revenue payable on the EarthLink contract. In any event, although he did not

expressly say so, he would have found that the bonus was not payable because

of the term requiring the employee to be in good standing to collect it.

Analysis

[73]    The trial judge made important findings of fact in relation to the appellant’s

claims for commissions. These findings were based on his assessment of all the

evidence, including conflicting testimony that required him to make findings of

credibility, which he resolved in favour of the respondent.


[74]    First, he found that the appellant was assigned the position of lead person

on the EarthLink account. He did not find the EarthLink opportunity. He worked

with a large team of the respondent’s employees.


[75]    Second, he rejected the appellant’s evidence that he was responsible for

obtaining a “deal in principle” with EarthLink prior to the termination of his

employment. This assertion was not confirmed by the documentary evidence and
                                    Page: 24


it was inconsistent with the appellant’s own words and conduct. He found that it

was “very improbable that EarthLink decided in late February 2010 to finalize a

deal with [the respondent]” and that the appellant was aware of this.


[76]   Third, he found that the appellant’s contribution to getting the EarthLink

deal to a finalized contract and converting it into revenue, was no more than 15

percent. He said, “I find that the plaintiff’s work, in a team context, probably

contributed no more than 15 percent to that outcome, and that that 15 percent

was in the preliminary stages of a protracted process.” In coming to this

conclusion, the trial judge accepted the respondent’s evidence that after the

appellant’s departure the respondent put much detailed and important work into

persuading EarthLink to deal with it. The appellant was only one of many of the

respondent’s employees who brought the deal to fruition. The work done after his

termination was much more of a contribution.


[77]   Fourth, the trial judge found that the appellant’s employment was not

terminated for the purpose of avoiding the payment of commissions on the

EarthLink deal. He was terminated due to poor sales performance.


[78]   These findings are grounded in the evidence and in the trial judge’s

assessment of the credibility of witnesses and we cannot interfere in the absence

of palpable and overriding error. No such error has been demonstrated.
                                      Page: 25


[79]   The trial judge’s findings of fact support the conclusion that the appellant

was not the “effective” or “substantial” cause of the EarthLink contract: see

Howard A. Levitt, The Law of Dismissal in Canada, loose-leaf, 3rd ed., (Aurora,

Ont.: Canada Law Book, 2003), at pp. 9-39 to 9-40. Had he been, there might

have been an argument that he had done all that was necessary to earn the

commissions and the commission plan only addressed the timing of payment.


[80]   But that argument is not available to the appellant. Not only was there no

contract signed with EarthLink at the time of his termination, the contract was not

signed until after the expiry of the reasonable notice period. Moreover, the

language of the commission plan precluded his recovery of commissions. The

appellant was not entitled to compensation for the commission because the

revenue from the EarthLink contract was not “booked” until more than a year

after the termination of his employment and he was not an “employee in good

standing” when he claimed the commission.


[81]   The appellant has failed to demonstrate any extricable legal error in the

trial judge’s interpretation of the challenging language of the Commission Plan.

That interpretation was informed by the evidence of the way in which the

respondent conducted its business and by the practical meaning given by the

parties to the termination of the contract.
                                       Page: 26


(4) Unjust Enrichment


[82]   The appellant submits that the respondent has been unjustly enriched. He

“harpooned the whale” – brought the lucrative EarthLink contract to the

respondent – but received no compensation for his efforts.


[83]   To    establish   a   claim   for   unjust   enrichment,   the   appellant   must

demonstrate: (1) an enrichment of the defendant; (2) a corresponding deprivation

of the plaintiff; and (3) an absence of juristic reason for the enrichment: Garland

v. Consumers' Gas Co., 2004 SCC 25, [2004] 1 SCR 629, at para. 30.


[84]   The appellant’s submissions on this issue impugn the trial judge’s findings

of fact concerning his contribution to the ultimate securing of the EarthLink

contract. The appellant asks us to re-evaluate the evidence, and the credibility of

the witnesses and to substitute our opinion for the trial judge’s. He has

demonstrated no palpable or overriding error in the trial judge’s assessment of

the evidence on this issue. In my view, there is simply no basis on which we can

interfere.


[85]   On the trial judge’s findings of fact, the appellant did not throw the first

harpoon, the whale was not firmly on the line when his employment was

terminated, and there was much work still to be done to bring it to shore. This
                                     Page: 27


work   was    not   accomplished   during   the   appellant’s   employment   and his

entitlement to commission did not arise during the reasonable notice period.


[86]   As I have noted, the trial judge found that the appellant was compensated

for his work on the EarthLink account through his base salary and he had

contractually agreed that he would not receive further compensation for his work

until revenues had been booked. Thus, the appellant suffered no deprivation and

there was a juristic reason for the enrichment of the respondent.


[87]   In my view, the trial judge made no error in finding there was no right to

equitable compensation on unjust enrichment principles.

(5) Damages


[88]   The respondent does not dispute that, if the appellant was entitled to

reasonable notice, he is entitled to be compensated for the commissions he

would have been paid in the ordinary course during the reasonable notice period.

G.     DISPOSITION


[89]   For these reasons, the appeal is allowed in part, and the judgment below is

varied by awarding damages assessed in the manner identified by the trial judge,

as set out in paragraph 37 of these reasons. Counsel indicated that they would

likely be able to resolve quantum. If they are unable to do so they may make

submissions in writing within 30 days of the release of these reasons.
                                    Page: 28


[90]   Success on this appeal is divided. If counsel are unable to resolve costs,

they may make written submissions, limited to five pages, excluding the costs

outline, also within 30 days.

                                                             “G.R. Strathy C.J.O.”
                                                     “I agree H.S. LaForme J.A.”
                                                       “I agree M.H. Tulloch J.A.”
Released: November 10, 2015
