                   COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

  CITATION: Poorkid Investments Inc. v. Ontario (Solicitor General), 2023 ONCA
                                                                            172
                                                               DATE: 20230315
                                                              DOCKET: C70397

                   Huscroft, Harvison Young and Sossin JJ.A.

BETWEEN

      Poorkid Investments Inc., The Coach Pyramids Inc., and Brian Haggith

                                                         Applicants (Respondents)

                                        and

      Solicitor General of Ontario Sylvia Jones, Ontario Provincial Police
Commissioner Thomas Carrique, Ontario Provincial Police Chief Superintendent
John Cain, Ontario Provincial Police Inspector Philip Carter and Her Majesty the
                         Queen in the Right of Ontario

                                                         Respondents (Appellants)

S. Zachary Green and Ryan Cookson, for the appellants

W. Peter Murray, for the respondents

Heard: August 18, 2022

On appeal from the order of Justice David A. Broad of the Superior Court of Justice,
dated February 10, 2022, with reasons reported at 2022 ONSC 883.

Huscroft J.A.:

OVERVIEW

[1]   The respondents, Poorkid Investments Inc., The Coach Pyramids Inc., and

Brian Haggith, are the named representative plaintiffs in a class action brought

against the appellants, which include the Crown, the Solicitor General of Ontario,
                                       Page: 2



the   Ontario   Provincial   Police   (“OPP”)    Commissioner,     the   OPP    Chief

Superintendent, and an Inspector of the OPP (collectively the “Crown”). They seek

damages arising out of the OPP’s response to protests by Indigenous activists in

Caledonia, Ontario and plead four grounds of liability: misfeasance in public office,

nonfeasance, negligence, and nuisance. In essence, the respondents allege that

the appellants failed to carry out their legal duties.

[2]   Proceedings brought against the Crown or an officer or employee of the

Crown that include a claim for misfeasance in public office or bad faith in the

exercise of public duties or functions are deemed to be stayed by operation of s. 17

of the Crown Liability and Proceedings Act, 2019, S.O. 2019 c. 7, Sch. 17 (“CLPA”),

and can proceed only with leave of the court. To obtain leave a plaintiff must

establish that the proceeding is brought in good faith and that there is a reasonable

possibility the claim will succeed.

[3]   The respondents did not seek leave under the CLPA to bring their

proceedings. Instead, they brought an application for a declaration that s. 17 of the

CLPA violates s. 96 of the Constitution Act, 1867 and is of no force and effect. The

application judge found that the financial cost of bringing a motion for leave under

s. 17 – almost exclusively legal fees – did not violate s. 96 of the Constitution Act,

1867. However, he found that the procedure established by s. 17 violated s. 96

because it bars claimants from presenting the evidence necessary to satisfy the
                                        Page: 3



court that there is a reasonable possibility that a claim will succeed, and so

prevents them from having “meaningful access” to the superior courts. The Crown

appeals.

[4]   I conclude that s. 17 of the CLPA is a valid exercise of provincial lawmaking

authority under s. 92(14) of the Constitution Act, 1867 and does not violate s. 96.

Although s. 17 of the CLPA makes it more difficult to bring proceedings against the

Crown, the leave requirement and associated rules established by s. 17 do not

touch on the core jurisdiction of superior courts, still less infringe it.

[5]   I would allow the appeal for the reasons that follow.

BACKGROUND

[6]   The respondents seek damages from the Crown on behalf of property

owners and businesses in Caledonia, Haldimand County, and the vicinity, as well

as those who entered agreements of purchase and sale for homes to be built in a

proposed subdivision known as McKenzie Meadows. The damages were alleged

to have been incurred as a result of the closure of public highways and a railway

line, occupation of the subdivision, and an interruption of hydro service.

[7]   The claim alleges that the OPP failed to carry out their duties under the

Comprehensive Ontario Police Services Act, 2019, S.O. 2019, c. 1, and wrongly

acted in accordance with the OPP’s “Framework for Police Preparedness for
                                      Page: 4



Aboriginal Critical Incidents”. Among other things, the OPP are alleged to have

failed to prevent crime and failed to enforce injunctions against the protests.

The Crown Liability and Proceedings Act, 2019

[8]   The CLPA replaced the Proceedings Against the Crown Act, R.S.O. 1990,

c. P.27. Like that Act, the CLPA imposes liability on the Crown for tortious conduct

from which it would otherwise be immune at common law. The CLPA preserves

various immunities for the Crown and officers, employees, and agents of the

Crown with respect to the performance of certain duties and governs the conduct

of proceedings in which the Crown is a party. The Act maintains some procedural

provisions similar to those in the Proceedings Against the Crown Act but effects a

significant change concerning some torts. Specifically, s. 17 of the CLPA

establishes a screening procedure that applies to claims against the Crown, or an

officer or employee of the Crown, for misfeasance in public office or a tort based

on bad faith respecting anything done in the exercise or intended exercise of

powers, duties, or functions.

[9]   Proceedings concerning the tort of misfeasance in public office or torts

based on bad faith in the exercise or intended exercise of public authority are

deemed stayed, unless leave to bring the proceeding is granted pursuant to

s. 17(2) of the CLPA:
                                       Page: 5



             (2) A proceeding to which this section applies that is brought on or
             after the day section 1 of Schedule 7 to the Smarter and Stronger
             Justice Act, 2020 comes into force may proceed only with leave of the
             court and, unless and until leave is granted, is deemed to have been
             stayed in respect of all claims in that proceeding from the time that it
             is brought.

[10]   The CLPA sets out a detailed leave procedure that limits the evidence that

may be adduced by the parties in ss. 17(3)-(7):

             (3) On a motion for leave under subsection (2), the claimant shall, in
             accordance with section 15 if applicable, serve on the defendant and
             file with the court,

                   (a) an affidavit, or such other document as may be prescribed,
                   setting out a concise statement of the material facts on which
                   the claimant intends to rely; and

                   (b) an affidavit of documents, or such other document as may
                   be prescribed, disclosing, to the full extent of the claimant’s
                   knowledge, information and belief, all documents relevant to
                   any matter in issue in the proceeding that are or have been in
                   the claimant’s possession, control or power.

             (4) On a motion for leave under subsection (2), the defendant may
             serve on the claimant and file an affidavit, or such other document as
             may be prescribed, setting out a concise statement of the material
             facts on which the defendant intends to rely for the defence, but is not
             required to do so.

             (5) No person may be examined or summoned for examination on the
             contents of an affidavit or prescribed document referred to in
             subsection (3) or (4) or in relation to the motion for leave, other than
             the maker of the affidavit or prescribed document.

             (6) The defendant shall not be subject to discovery or the inspection
             of documents, or to examination for discovery, in relation to the motion
             for leave.

             (7) The court shall not grant leave unless it is satisfied that,
                                      Page: 6



                    (a) the proceeding is being brought in good faith; and

                    (b) there is a reasonable possibility that the claim described in
                    subsection (1) would be resolved in the claimant’s favour.

[11]   In summary, claimants must file an affidavit setting out the material facts on

which they intend to rely, along with an affidavit of documents; the defendant may

file an affidavit but is under no obligation to do so; no one is to be examined or

summoned for examination in regard to the affidavit, affidavit of documents, or in

relation to the motion for leave except for the maker of the affidavit or prescribed

document; and the defendant is not subject to discovery or the inspection of

documents, or to examination for discovery. The constitutionality of this screening

process is the question at the heart of this appeal.

The application judge’s decision

[12]   The respondents brought an application seeking a declaration that s. 17 of

the CLPA violates s. 96 of the Constitution Act, 1867 and is of no force or effect.

The application was supported by two affidavits, one from a practicing litigation

lawyer, David Thompson, and the other from the CEO of a company that provides

consulting services to lawyers and law firms including in relation to class actions,

David Johnson. Neither was tendered or qualified as an expert witness.

Mr. Johnson’s affidavit included quotations from the Premier of Ontario,

Doug Ford, and the press secretary for the Attorney General of Ontario, taken from

media sources. The Crown cross examined Mr. Thompson but not Mr. Johnson,
                                      Page: 7



and filed no evidence in response to the application. There was, in short, little

evidence before the application judge.

[13]   The application judge framed the question before him as whether s. 96 of

the Constitution Act, 1867 is “infringed by legislation that requires persons seeking

to pursue an action against the Crown (or its agents) alleging bad faith or

misfeasance in public office to obtain leave of the court to do so in circumstances

where the defendant Crown is not obliged to make any documentary discovery or

to submit to any oral examination”.

[14]   The application judge found that the rule of law, which informs a proper

interpretation of s. 96, requires not simply access to the superior courts but

meaningful access, which he described as “ensuring that a litigant’s claim is

determined on its merits, including the right to present material evidence”. The

application judge found that s. 17 precluded this, taking judicial notice of what he

described    as   facts   in   published   comments      on    the   legislation   by

Professor Erika Chamberlain, who he quoted as follows:

             In lawsuits involving bad faith, plaintiffs must now get
             permission from a court before they can sue and show
             that their claim has a reasonable possibility of success.
             During this process, the Crown can examine the plaintiff,
             but need not produce any documents or witnesses itself.

             This puts plaintiffs in a tough position. Bad faith is
             essentially a state of mind, so it’s typically difficult to
             prove without at least some evidence from the defendant.
             For instance, it may require disclosure of internal
                                      Page: 8



             communications showing that an official was acting for
             an improper purpose or with bias against the plaintiff.

             Without the disclosure of these documents or the ability
             to question government officers, plaintiffs will only be
             able to speculate that bad faith was involved. This may
             not be sufficient to get a court’s permission to proceed.

[15]   Based on this commentary, the application judge concluded that bad faith is

a state of mind; it is difficult to prove in the absence of evidence from a defendant;

and it may require disclosure of a defendant’s internal communications.

[16]   The application judge acknowledged that the implementation of a robust

deterrent screening mechanism to prevent unmeritorious claims against the Crown

from proceeding is a valid legislative objective that does not, by itself, prevent

access to the superior courts in a manner contrary to s. 96 of the Constitution Act,

1867. But relying on Trial Lawyers Association of British Columbia v. British

Columbia (Attorney General), 2014 SCC 59, [2014] 3 S.C.R. 31, the application

judge noted that the legislature’s power to establish screening mechanisms is not

unlimited. In a key passage in his decision, the application judge stated:

             In my view, prohibiting any documentary or oral discovery
             of the defendant as an integral part of the screening
             mechanism does prevent many claimants who may well
             have meritorious claims against the Crown based on bad
             faith or misfeasance in public office from having
             meaningful access to the Superior Court in a way that is
             inconsistent with s. 96 and the requirements that flow by
             necessary implication from s. 96. This inconsistency is
             brought about by barring such claimants from any
             realistic and effective means of presenting sufficient,
                                      Page: 9



             credible and necessary evidence to satisfy the court that
             there is a reasonable possibility that their claims would
             succeed.

[17]   Thus, the application judge concluded that s. 17 is unconstitutional because

it establishes a barrier to “meaningful” access to the superior courts, while denying

a realistic and effective means of overcoming that barrier by relieving the Crown

from being subject to documentary and oral discovery.

[18]   The application judge went on to find that the remedies of reading in, reading

down, or severance were not appropriate because it could not be assumed that

the Legislature would have passed the tailored provision, and there was no basis

to determine the specifics of a discovery mechanism. He concluded that the

appropriate remedy was to issue a declaration that s. 17 is of no force or effect,

leaving it to the Legislature to enact a new, constitutionally compliant provision

should it wish to do so.

DISCUSSION

[19]   I begin with a brief discussion of the role and jurisdiction of superior courts

before addressing the issues in this case.

The role and jurisdiction of superior courts

[20]   Although Canada’s constitutional structure is premised on federalism,

Canada’s judicial system is unitary in nature: the judges of provincial superior

courts are appointed by the federal government. In Reference re Residential
                                       Page: 10



Tenancies Act, [1981] 1 S.C.R. 714, at p. 728 (“Residential Tenancies”), Dickson J.

(as he then was) described the judicature provisions of the Constitution Act, 1867

as supporting a “strong constitutional base for national unity”. In Reference re

Code of Civil Procedure (Que.), art. 35, 2021 SCC 27, 459 D.L.R. (4th) 555

(“Quebec Reference”), the Supreme Court emphasized that the judicature

provisions, along with s. 92(14), were designed by the Fathers of Confederation to

strike a balance between provincial initiatives on the administration of justice and

the need to respect the status of the superior courts as the centrepiece of the

unitary judicial system. The Court added that the fundamental principles underlying

s. 96 and the organization of Canada’s judiciary are national unity and the rule of

law: Quebec Reference, at paras. 1-2,4.

Provincial legislative authority

[21]   Section 92(14) of the Constitution Act, 1867 establishes the exclusive

authority of the provinces over the administration of justice, which includes

prescribing the procedure that must be followed in civil matters. As the application

judge noted, Ontario has established various procedural mechanisms that govern

the ability of litigants to bring their disputes to the superior courts for adjudication,

including r. 21.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, which

permits matters to be determined prior to trial; r. 20 of the Rules of Civil Procedure,

which establishes a summary judgment procedure to resolve matters without a
                                        Page: 11



trial; rr. 2.1.01 and 2.1.02 of the Rules of Civil Procedure and s. 140 of the Courts

of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, which preclude frivolous or vexatious

proceedings; and the Class Proceedings Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 6, which permits

class actions by named plaintiffs but requires preliminary motions to certify the

proceedings and appoint a representative plaintiff.

[22]   There is no question that the CLPA is within Ontario’s legislative authority.

However, Ontario’s authority to enact the CLPA must be considered alongside

other constitutional provisions to ensure the consistent operation of the

Constitution as a whole. Provincial legislative authority under s. 92(14) cannot be

exercised in a manner that infringes s. 96 and the core jurisdiction of superior

courts that it has been held to protect.

Protecting the core jurisdiction of the superior courts

[23]   Section 96 of the Constitution Act, 1867 is ostensibly a simple provision

governing the appointment of judges to the superior courts – courts of inherent

jurisdiction. It provides as follows:

             96. The Governor General shall appoint the Judges of the Superior,
             District, and County Courts in each Province, except those of the
             Courts of Probate in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.

[24]   However, s. 96 has come to be understood as performing a much more

significant role: “protecting the special status of the superior courts of general

jurisdiction as the cornerstone of our unitary justice system”: Quebec Reference,
                                          Page: 12



at para. 4. Doctrine has developed with a view to protecting the special status of

the superior courts – ensuring that their jurisdiction is not usurped by Parliament

or a provincial legislature, whether by transferring their core powers to inferior

courts and administrative tribunals or removing them altogether. If this were to

occur, the superior courts would lose their essential nature and the federal-

provincial structural balance fundamental to Canada’s justice system would be

lost.

[25]    Where legislation seeks to establish adjudicative authority in an

administrative tribunal or inferior court, the three-part test set out in Residential

Tenancies applies. The court asks:

   1) Whether the power, function, or jurisdiction purported to be conferred

        conforms to the power, function, or jurisdiction exercised by s. 96 courts at

        the time of confederation. If it does, the court asks:

   2) Whether, in its institutional context, the power, function, or jurisdiction is

        judicial in nature. If it is, the court asks:

   3) Whether, having regard to the tribunal’s function as a whole, the power is a

        sole or central function of the tribunal, such that it is operating like a s. 96

        court.

[26]    In essence, the Residential Tenancies test permits administrative tribunals

and inferior courts to exercise authority once exercised by s. 96 courts so long as
                                              Page: 13



the exercise of that authority is not the sole or central function of the tribunal or

inferior court, such that it is operating like a s. 96 court: Residential Tenancies, at

p. 736. The Residential Tenancies test thus aims to protect the historical

jurisdiction of superior courts: Quebec Reference, at paras. 55-59.

[27]   In MacMillan Bloedel Ltd. v. Simpson, [1995] 4 S.C.R. 725, the Supreme

Court added that while adjudicative authority can, in some circumstances, be

established outside the context of the superior courts, on no account can the

inherent or core jurisdiction of the superior courts be transferred exclusively to

another court or removed. Lamer C.J., writing for a majority of the Court,

acknowledged that the core jurisdiction concept was difficult to define, but said that

it is of “paramount importance” to the existence of the superior courts. He endorsed

a broad conception set out by I.H. Jacob in “The Inherent Jurisdiction of the Court”

(1970), 23 Curr. Legal Probs. 23, in which Jacob described the power of superior

courts to maintain their authority and prevent their process from being obstructed as

“intrinsic” and the “very life-blood” and “very essence” of superior courts. “Without

such a power”, Jacob wrote: “the court would have form but would lack substance.

The jurisdiction which is inherent in a superior court of law is that which enables it to

fulfil itself as a court of law”: at p. 27.

[28]   Thus, core jurisdiction is defining of the superior courts and must be guarded

jealously. In MacMillan Bloedel, Lamer C.J. put the matter this highly: removal of
                                      Page: 14



any part of the core jurisdiction, he said, “emasculates the court, making it

something other than a superior court”: at para. 30.

[29]   There is no claim that the CLPA has transferred the core jurisdiction of the

superior courts to another body; jurisdiction over the relevant tort claims continues

to lie with the superior courts. The procedure governing the adjudication of those

actions has changed, however, and the question is whether this procedural change

is tantamount to a removal of the superior courts’ core jurisdiction. The application

judge held that it was, likening the effect of the screening procedure to the hearing

fees at issue in Trial Lawyers. As I explain below, the trial judge’s reasoning is

premised on a misreading of that case.

Trial Lawyers

[30]   Trial Lawyers concerned a challenge to the constitutionality of hearing fees

– charges for the daily use of the court – set out in the rules applying to proceedings

in the Supreme Court of British Columbia. McLachlin C.J., writing for a majority of

the Court, held that the hearing fees were so high as to prevent people from coming

to the courts to have their disputes resolved. This, she said, prevented the

business of the courts from being done; it infringed the core jurisdiction of superior

courts by depriving them of their ability to serve as courts of inherent general

jurisdiction. She reasoned as follows:
                                      Page: 15



             The historic task of the superior courts is to resolve
             disputes between individuals and decide questions of
             private and public law. Measures that prevent people
             from coming to the courts to have those issues resolved
             are at odds with this basic judicial function. The resolution
             of these disputes and resulting determination of issues of
             private and public law, viewed in the institutional context
             of the Canadian justice system, are central to what the
             superior courts do. Indeed, it is their very book of
             business. To prevent this business being done strikes at
             the core of the jurisdiction of the superior courts protected
             by s. 96 of the Constitution Act, 1867. As a result, hearing
             fees that deny people access to the courts infringe the
             core jurisdiction of the superior courts: at para. 32.

[31]   Trial Lawyers is an exceptional decision that is expressly limited in its reach.

The Supreme Court did not hold that the hearing fees infringed s. 96 of the

Constitution Act, 1867 simply because they prevented some individuals from

accessing the superior courts. Nor could it have done so. Section 96 is a structural

provision of the Constitution; it does not establish individual rights and in particular

does not establish an individual right of access to the superior courts. It would be

a mistake to conclude that because a structural provision of the Constitution exists

for the benefit of persons – because it serves the common good by establishing

the judicial system or the institutions of government – it establishes a justiciable

individual right. The hearing fees impugned in Trial Lawyers were found to

impermissibly infringe the core jurisdiction of the superior courts because they

deprived the superior courts of their ability to hear and determine disputes

otherwise within that jurisdiction. This was a matter of impairing the function of a
                                       Page: 16



superior court as an institution charged with delivering the common good, not a

violation of an individual’s constitutional rights. The difference is significant: the

focus of the Supreme Court’s analysis was necessarily on the courts as an

institution rather than on individual rights.

[32]   The Supreme Court confirmed this understanding of Trial Lawyers recently

in the Quebec Reference. A majority of the Court characterized the problem in Trial

Lawyers this way: those who could not afford the hearing fees but were not eligible

for an income-based exemption from paying them “fell through the cracks in the

judicial system; their disputes could no longer be resolved by the law, which

jeopardized the maintenance of an actual order of positive laws and thus the rule

of law”: at para. 69.

[33]   Trial Lawyers specifically rejected the argument that hearing fees are

unconstitutional per se. Although McLachlin C.J. did not explain when hearing fees

become sufficiently high as to infringe the core jurisdiction of the superior courts,

it is plain from the language of the decision that quantum matters. Hearing fees

are impermissible when they “prevent” disputes from coming to the courts; “deny”

or “effectively [deny]” disputes coming before the superior courts; “[bar] access” to

the superior courts; and so on: Trial Lawyers, at paras. 32-37. In other words,

financial impediments to access to the superior courts rise to the level of a
                                       Page: 17



constitutional infringement only if they have the effect of preventing the superior

courts from exercising their core jurisdiction.

[34]   The core jurisdiction concept has, from the outset, been understood as “very

narrow”, including “only critically important jurisdictions which are essential to the

existence of a superior court of inherent jurisdiction and to the preservation of its

fundamental role within our legal system”: Reference re Amendments to the

Residential Tenancies Act (N.S.), [1996] 1 S.C.R. 186, per Lamer C.J.

(concurring), at p. 224. The Supreme Court confirmed the narrow scope of the

concept in the Quebec Reference, noting that it focuses on the essential business

of the superior courts: “review of the legality and constitutional validity of laws,

enforcement of its orders, control over its own process, and its residual jurisdiction

as a court of original general jurisdiction”: at para. 68. For their part, Wagner C.J.

and Rowe J. (dissenting in part) emphasized that the superior courts’ core

jurisdiction involves only “critically important” jurisdictions, the deprivation of which

would deprive the superior courts of the ability to play their central and unifying

role in the constitutional order and to uphold the rule of law: at para. 233.

[35]   This case is nothing like Trial Lawyers. Section 17 of the CLPA does no

more than regulate the way in which disputes come before the superior courts. It

does not prevent disputes from being heard and determined by the superior courts
                                     Page: 18



and in no way infringes – let alone “emasculates” – the core jurisdiction s. 96

protects.

Section 17 of the CLPA does not infringe the core jurisdiction of the

superior courts

[36]   Much of the confusion in this case arises out of the misreading of Trial

Lawyers and s. 96 caselaw outlined above. Section 96 caselaw is concerned with

protecting the status of superior courts and the core of their adjudicative authority

from legislative and executive encroachment. It is not concerned with the ability of

individuals to access the superior courts and does not establish an individual right

of access to the superior courts. Limitations on access to the superior courts are

matters of constitutional concern under s. 96 of the Constitution Act, 1867 only in

so far as they impermissibly infringe the core jurisdiction of the superior courts.

Nothing of the sort has occurred in this case.

[37]   The application judge errs at the outset of his analysis by characterizing

s. 17 of the CLPA as establishing a “barrier” to accessing the superior courts.

Nothing in s. 17 bars, denies, or otherwise prevents access to the superior courts

and their core function of adjudicating disputes. Section 17 establishes a screening

process – a procedure that allows the superior courts to screen out unmeritorious

claims. The operation of the screening process is determined by the superior

courts themselves: they determine whether or not a claim may proceed based on
                                     Page: 19



their interpretation and application of the criteria set out in s. 17. In other words,

the superior courts continue to exercise their core jurisdiction – hearing and

resolving disputes.

[38]   According to the application judge, the absence of documentary and oral

discovery prevents meritorious claims against the Crown from proceeding,

essentially because s. 17 makes it too difficult to obtain leave. I set out the key

passage from the judgment again:

             In my view, prohibiting any documentary or oral discovery
             of the defendant as an integral part of the screening
             mechanism does prevent many claimants who may well
             have meritorious claims against the Crown based on bad
             faith or misfeasance in public office from having
             meaningful access to the Superior Court in a way that is
             inconsistent with s. 96 and the requirements that flow by
             necessary implication from s. 96. This inconsistency is
             brought about by barring such claimants from any
             realistic and effective means of presenting sufficient,
             credible and necessary evidence to satisfy the court that
             there is a reasonable possibility that their claims would
             succeed.

[39]   There are two problems with this passage, both of them fatal to a finding of

inconsistency with s. 96. The first is that, even taking the argument on its own

terms, there was no evidentiary basis to support the conclusion that prohibiting

documentary and oral discovery in the screening process deprives individuals of

access to the superior courts. The most that could be said on the record before the

application judge was that s. 17 makes it more difficult to pursue particular types
                                       Page: 20



of claims against the Crown by establishing an additional procedural step.

However, there is no evidence as to how easy or difficult it is to satisfy this

procedural step. Secondly, and more fundamentally, even assuming that it is

difficult to satisfy the procedural step, mere difficulty in proceeding with a claim

cannot be equated with preventing the superior courts from exercising their core

jurisdiction in the manner contemplated by Trial Lawyers. I address each of these

problems below.

There is no evidence that the law prevents access to the superior courts

[40]   As noted above, the application judge made findings of fact based on

academic commentary, which asserted that bad faith is a state of mind that is

difficult to prove without evidence from the defendant and that proving bad faith

may require disclosure of the defendant’s internal communications. This

commentary entered the litigation in a roundabout way: it was published in an

online publication and referenced in an online news article that was attached as

an exhibit to Mr. Johnson’s affidavit. The affidavit itself did not refer to the original

online publication nor did it attach the publication itself.

[41]   The application judge erred in taking judicial notice of the statements made

in this commentary. There was no evidence before the application judge

concerning the necessity of discovery for purposes of establishing a claim of bad

faith or misfeasance in public office – a factual vacuum created by the respondents’
                                     Page: 21



choice not to bring a leave motion pursuant to s. 17 of the CLPA. The commentary

quoted by the application judge was not factual in nature; it was the expression of

an opinion and there was no basis for the application judge to take judicial notice

of its conclusions and assumptions as statements of fact. As the Crown notes, it is

not the claimant’s burden under s. 17 of the CLPA to establish bad faith in any

event: claimants need only establish a reasonable possibility that their claim will

succeed, and the respondents did not even attempt to meet that burden in this

case.

[42]    There is, of course, nothing inappropriate about citing academic legal

scholarship and much to be gained when it comes to better understanding legal

concepts that may be relevant to judicial reasoning. But whether academic

commentary or scholarship purports simply to describe the law or to explain it, it is

not properly the subject of judicial notice – that is, it cannot be accepted as fact

without proof. It is not subject to the sort of constraints that govern the use of

evidence in the litigation process, and there is a risk that reliance on it may result

in evidence being imported into judicial proceedings indirectly, bypassing the

relevant evidentiary safeguards. See the helpful discussion of judicial notice by

Brown J.A. in R. v. J.M., 2021 ONCA 150, 154 O.R. (3d) 401, at paras. 29-38.

[43]    Academic arguments should be assessed with the same sort of critical

detachment as submissions from counsel. To the extent that academic arguments
                                      Page: 22



have a normative purpose – to the extent they are concerned with what the law

ought to be rather than what it is – they are inherently controversial and properly

subject to critique and challenge from other scholars. Their significance and

shortcomings cannot be understood without placing them in this context. But

whether scholarship is ostensibly descriptive or normative, it is improper to take

judicial notice of the facts asserted or the conclusions reached.

Leave requirements do not infringe the core jurisdiction of the superior courts

[44]   The application judge described aspects of s. 17 of the CLPA as

unprecedented in Canadian law, and on appeal the Crown says that the application

judge erred in this regard: the leave requirement in s. 17 is modeled on s. 138.8 of

the Securities Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.5. The respondents disagree, but there is no

need to resolve this matter. Whether s. 17 of the CLPA is unprecedented is

irrelevant to whether it impermissibly infringes s. 96 of the Constitution Act, 1867.

[45]   The most that can be said is that, on its face, s. 17 of the CLPA makes it

more difficult for some tort claims against the Crown to proceed than it was under

the Proceedings Against the Crown Act. As a result it is conceivable, if not likely,

that fewer claims will proceed than might otherwise be the case. But that is not

relevant to whether s. 17 infringes s. 96 of the Constitution Act, 1867. Section 96

does not require that all tort claims be treated alike, much less litigation in general,

and it has nothing to say about whether any particular claim should survive a
                                      Page: 23



preliminary screening process conducted by the court. The core jurisdiction of

superior courts under s. 96 is impermissibly infringed only if the superior courts are

prevented from serving as courts of inherent general jurisdiction. Nothing in s. 17

of the CLPA has this effect.

[46]   The application judge’s error is apparent from the way in which he describes

the alleged infringement of s. 96. He does not say that the leave requirements in

s. 17 prevent superior courts from hearing disputes or fulfilling their constitutional

role as a court of inherent general jurisdiction; he says the leave requirements

prevent some claimants from having meaningful access to the superior courts. This

is not an application of or even an expansion of the holding in Trial Lawyers; it is

an unwarranted change to it. It subtly recasts s. 96 as an individual rights provision

– a change neither required nor permitted by s. 96 jurisprudence or the Constitution

Act, 1867.

[47]   Section 17 of the CLPA does not interfere with the constitutional role of the

superior courts. That some – perhaps even many – claimants will be denied leave

to bring proceedings as a result of the screening mechanism does not mean that

the constitutional role of the superior courts has been impermissibly infringed.

Claimants will be denied leave to bring proceedings only after they have had

access to the superior courts and failed to satisfy the courts as to the strength of

their case. Superior courts are still able to hear the relevant tort claims and fulfill
                                     Page: 24



their cornerstone role in Canada’s unitary justice system. Whether it is considered

good or bad policy to screen particular tort claims against the Crown is irrelevant;

so long as the legislation does not prevent the superior courts from exercising their

core jurisdiction, it does not impermissibly infringe s. 96 of the Constitution Act,

1867.

[48]    In short, s. 96 immunizes neither the substantive content of the law nor the

procedure governing litigation against legislative reform: the Legislature may

establish, amend, or repeal causes of action, and may establish various procedural

requirements. Section 96 protects the core jurisdiction of the superior courts, but

procedural requirements that must be met before particular claims may be brought

cannot be equated with depriving the superior courts of the ability to hear disputes

and so preventing them from fulfilling their constitutional role – especially given

that the superior courts will determine whether those procedural requirements

have been met.

Section 17 of the CLPA is not inconsistent with the rule of law

[49]    The application judge drew support for his “meaningful access” concept from

the rule of law, which he said is met “not by mere access to the court in the sense

affording litigants the simple right to make submissions, but rather by meaningful

access to the court in the sense of ensuring that a litigant’s claim is determined on

its merits, including the right to present material evidence.” Although he purported
                                       Page: 25



to rely on the rule of law as an interpretive aid, as I will explain, his decision is at

odds with the concept and the purpose for which it may be invoked.

[50]   I will briefly outline the rule of law concept and the use of unwritten principles

in constitutional litigation before addressing the application judge’s error.

The nature of the rule of law

[51]   The rule of law is a venerable principle of political philosophy – a complex,

multifaceted ideal that informs legislative and judicial processes. It has ancient

origins and has been developed in a tradition running through scholars such as

Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas, Sir William Blackstone, and A.V. Dicey. The rule of law

is the subject of a large and growing body of contemporary academic scholarship:

see, for example, Kristen Rundle, Revisiting the Rule of Law (New York:

Cambridge University Press, 2022); Frederick Schauer, “Lon Fuller and the Rule

of Law” (2020) University of Virginia School of Law Public Law and Legal Theory

Paper Series 2020-46; John Tasioulas, “The Rule of Law” in Tasioulas, ed., The

Cambridge Companion to the Philosophy of Law (Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 2019); and Brian Z. Tamanaha, “The History and Elements of the

Rule of Law” (2012) Sing. J.L.S. 232.

[52]   To say that the rule of law is respected in a legal order is to make a claim

about the health of that legal order – that it is functioning in accordance with a

range of criteria the concept may be understood as embracing. Lon Fuller famously
                                      Page: 26



offered a list of eight rule of law principles he described as the “inner morality of

law” in The Morality of Law, rev’d edn. (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1969),

at pp. 33-38. According to Fuller, the law should be: 1) general in nature; 2)

publicized; 3) prospective in operation; 4) understandable; 5) non-contradictory; 6)

possible to comply with; 7) relatively constant; and 8) congruent with its

administration. John Finnis offers a similar account in Natural Law and Natural

Rights, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011), at pp. 270-71: “A legal

system exemplifies the Rule of Law to the extent … that (i) its rules are prospective,

not retroactive, and (ii) are not in any other way impossible to comply with; that (iii)

its rules are promulgated, (iv) clear, and (v) coherent one with another; that (vi) its

rules are sufficiently stable to allow people to be guided by their knowledge of the

content of the rules; that (vii) the making of decrees and orders applicable to

relatively limited situations is guided by rules that are promulgated, clear, stable,

and relatively general; and that (viii) those people who have authority to make,

administer, and apply the rules in an official capacity (a) are accountable for their

compliance with rules applicable to their performance and (b) do actually

administer the law consistently and in accordance with its tenor.”

[53]   Contemporary accounts of the rule of law typically share a number of these

commitments but may differ in important respects. This is to be expected: good

faith disagreement about the essential nature of the rule of law flourishes in any
                                       Page: 27



democratic order that aspires to the ideal: see Jeremy Waldron, “The Rule of Law

as an Essentially Contested Concept” (2021) NYU School of Law Public Law and

Legal Theory Research Paper Series, Working Paper No. 21-15. The rule of law

has always served as a constitutional lodestar for lawmakers – an ideal to be

aspired to, rather than a canonical set of rules that is subject to enforcement.

[54]   The Supreme Court outlined the elements of the rule of law for adjudication

purposes in the Re Manitoba Language Rights, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 721 and the

Reference re Secession of Quebec, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 217. Those elements are: 1)

the supremacy of the law over the acts of government and private persons; 2) the

creation and maintenance of an actual order of positive laws that preserves and

embodies the more general principle of normative order; and 3) the requirement

that the relationship between the state and the individual be regulated by law.

[55]   These elements focus on the nature and purpose of the law rather than its

substance, and are not independently enforceable in legal proceedings. As

Wagner C.J. and Brown J., writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, explained

in Toronto (City) v. Ontario (Attorney General), 2021 SCC 34, 462 D.L.R. (4th) 1,

at para. 58, to enforce unwritten constitutional principles would trespass on the

legislature’s authority to amend the Constitution, raise concerns about the

legitimacy of judicial review, and distort the separation of powers. Fundamentally,

it would be at odds with the settlement reflected in the text of the Constitution itself.
                                       Page: 28



Thus, they stated the conclusion categorically: “unwritten constitutional principles

cannot serve as bases for invalidating legislation”: Toronto (City), at para. 63.

Nothing could be clearer.

[56]   There is nothing new or surprising in this. The Court reached the same

conclusion when considering the unwritten principle of the rule of law in British

Columbia v. Imperial Tobacco Canada Ltd., 2005 SCC 49, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 473, at

paras. 59-60. Nevertheless, it is clear that the elements of rule of law identified by

the Court may be invoked both as an interpretive aid and to help develop

necessary structural constitutional doctrines: Toronto (City), at paras. 55-56. The

majority in Toronto (City) cites Trial Lawyers as an example of the rule of law

informing a purposive interpretation of s. 96 of the Constitution Act, at para. 55.

[57]   However, two distinct difficulties attend the use of the rule of law as an

interpretive aid in adjudication. The first is the need to respect the scope of the

elements of the rule of law identified by the Court. The second is the difficulty of

maintaining the distinction between the use of rule of law as an interpretive aid,

which is legitimate, and direct enforcement of the rule of law to invalidate

legislation, which is not. The application judge’s decision illustrates both difficulties.
                                       Page: 29



“Meaningful access to the court” as described by the application judge is not an

element of the rule of law

[58]   It seems reasonable that there should be “meaningful access to the court in

the sense of ensuring that a litigant’s claim is determined on its merits, including

the right to present material evidence”, but the application judge’s “meaningful

access” concept is not required by the rule of law on that account, nor does it

engage the aspect of the rule of law dealing with physical access to courts set out

in B.C.G.E.U. v. British Columbia (Attorney General), [1988] 2 S.C.R. 214.

[59]   The rule of law is not a repository of all things considered desirable in a legal

system. None of the elements of the rule of law recognized in Re Manitoba

Language Rights and Reference re Secession of Quebec speak directly to the

terms of legislation: Imperial Tobacco, at para. 59.

[60]   Indeed, it is noteworthy that in Imperial Tobacco the Supreme Court rejected

several “fair civil trial” features asserted as protected by the rule of law in upholding

the constitutionality of British Columbia legislation that went much further than

s. 17 of the CLPA: it authorized actions by the provincial government against

tobacco product manufacturers for the recovery of health care expenses incurred

by the government, changed evidentiary requirements, permitted the government

to establish aggregate claims, reversed the burden of proof in several respects,

and operated retrospectively. The legislation changed the general rules of civil
                                      Page: 30



litigation considerably, but, as the Supreme Court stated, there is no constitutional

right to have one’s civil trial governed by customary rules of civil procedure and

evidence: Imperial Tobacco, at para. 76. That conclusion applies with equal force

in this case.

The rule of law as an interpretive aid

[61]   The written aspects of the Constitution are carefully crafted, reflecting

constitutional settlements that courts must respect. Unwritten constitutional

principles may provide interpretive guidance for understanding the nature of

particular constitutional settlements, but that guidance is ultimately limited by

constitutional text and design. Courts cannot rely on unwritten constitutional

principles to alter or supplement the text of the Constitution; constitutional text has

“primordial” importance and can be changed only by constitutional amendment:

Quebec (Attorney General) v. 9147-0732 Québec Inc., 2020 SCC 32, 451 D.L.R.

(4th) 367, at para. 11; Toronto (City), at para. 65.

[62]   Section 17 of the CLPA changes only the way in which some claims proceed

in the superior courts. In doing so it does not offend the rule of law. On the contrary,

the rule of law requires that s.17 be enforced as enacted. Whether it is considered

good or bad policy – fair or unfair on some metric – is for the Legislature to

determine. The political process is not to be bypassed by the courts.
                                      Page: 31



[63]   That is what occurred in this case. Although the application judge

acknowledged that the rule of law could not be invoked to invalidate legislation, his

decision that s. 17 of the CLPA is inconsistent with s. 96 rests largely on the

“meaningful access” principle he identified as an element of the rule of law, which

he relied on in interpreting s. 96. In effect, the application judge’s interpretation so

alters s. 96 doctrine that it directly enforces his “meaningful access” principle.

[64]   The result is a decision that renders unconstitutional procedural rules

properly made pursuant to s. 92(14) of the Constitution Act, 1867. The rule of law

does not support this decision. On the contrary, both the Constitution and the rule

of law require that s. 17 of the CLPA be given effect.

CONCLUSION

[65]   I would allow the appeal.

[66]   The appellants are entitled to costs of the appeal fixed in the amount of

$30,000 and to costs on the application below of $49,908.40, both figures inclusive

of HST and disbursements.

Released: March 15, 2023 “G.H.”
                                                                  “Grant Huscroft J.A.”
                                                    “I agree. A. Harvison Young J.A.”
                                                                 “I agree. Sossin J.A.”
