                    COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

           CITATION: Waksdale v. Swegon North America Inc., 2020 ONCA 391
                                                           DATE: 20200617
                                                         DOCKET: C67616

                      Pepall, Hourigan and Roberts JJ.A.


BETWEEN
                              Benjamin Waksdale

                                                                           Plaintiff
                                                                        (Appellant)

                                      and

                          Swegon North America Inc.


                                                                        Defendant
                                                                      (Respondent)

Philip R. White and Jason K. Wong, for the appellant

Landon Young and Amanda Boyce, for the respondent

Heard: in writing

On appeal from the order of Justice Edward M. Morgan of the Superior Court of
Justice, dated October 3, 2019, with reasons reported at 2019 ONSC 5705.

                          REASONS FOR DECISION

Introduction

[1]   The appellant sued the respondent for wrongful dismissal and moved for

summary judgment, arguing that he was entitled to damages because the

respondent did not provide him with reasonable notice of dismissal.
                                    Page: 2


[2]   The primary issue on the motion was the legal effect of the written

employment contract between the parties. The appellant took the position that the

termination clause in his employment contract was void because it was an attempt

to contract out of the minimum standards of the Employment Standards Act, 2000,

S.O. 2000, c. 41 (the “ESA”). The respondent conceded that the “Termination for

Cause” provision in the contract was void because it violated the ESA. However,

it argued that the “Termination of Employment with Notice” provision in the

agreement was valid and, because it was not alleging cause, it could rely on the

latter provision.

[3]   The motion judge dismissed both the motion for summary judgment and the

appellant’s action, and awarded the respondent $16,000 for costs of the action. He

concluded that the Termination of Employment with Notice provision is a stand-

alone, unambiguous, and enforceable clause.

[4]   In our view, the motion judge erred in law in his interpretation of the

employment contract. The termination provisions are unenforceable because they

violate the ESA. Therefore, we allow the appeal, set aside the motion judge’s

order, and order that the matter be remitted to the motion judge to determine the

quantum of the appellant’s damages.
                                     Page: 3


Analysis

[5]   The appellant began his employment with the respondent on January 8,

2018 as a director of sales. His total income was approximately $200,000 per

annum. The respondent terminated the appellant without cause on October 18,

2018 and paid the appellant two weeks’ pay in lieu of notice.

[6]   The respondent conceded on the motion that the Termination for Cause

provision in the employment contract breached the ESA. Likewise, the appellant

acknowledged that the Termination of Employment with Notice provision complied

with the minimum requirements of the ESA. Therefore, the issue for the motion

judge was the discrete question of whether the illegality of the Termination for

Cause provision rendered the Termination of Employment with Notice provision

unenforceable.

[7]   The law regarding the interpretation of termination clauses in employment

contracts was helpfully summarized by Laskin J.A. at para. 28 of Wood v. Fred

Deeley Imports Ltd., 2017 ONCA 158, 134 O.R. (3d) 481. The following points from

that summary are particularly apt for the purposes of this appeal:

                 • The ESA is remedial legislation, intended to
                   protect the interests of employees. Courts should
                   thus favour an interpretation of the ESA that
                   “encourages employers to comply with the
                   minimum requirements of the Act” and “extends its
                   protections to as many employees as possible”,
                   over an interpretation that does not do so:
                   Machtinger, p. 1003.
                                      Page: 4


                • Termination clauses should be interpreted in a way
                  that encourages employers to draft agreements
                  that comply with the ESA. If the only consequence
                  employers suffer for drafting a termination clause
                  that fails to comply with the ESA is an order that
                  they comply, then they will have little or no
                  incentive to draft a lawful termination clause at the
                  beginning of the employment relationship:
                  Machtinger, p. 1004.

[8]   Laskin J.A. went on to observe that the enforceability of a termination

provision in an employment contract must be determined as at the time the

agreement was executed. The wording of the contract alone should be considered

in deciding whether it contravenes the ESA, not what the employer might have

done on termination: Wood, at paras, 43-44. Thus, even if an employer’s actions

comply with its ESA obligations on termination, that compliance does not have the

effect of saving a termination provision that violates the ESA.

[9]   In the present case, there is no question that the respondent would not be

permitted to rely on the Termination for Cause provision. The issue is whether the

two clauses should be considered separately or whether the illegality of the

Termination for Cause provision impacts the enforceability of the Termination of

Employment with Notice provision. The respondent submits that where there are

two discrete termination provisions that by their terms apply to different situations,

courts should consider whether one provision impacts upon the other and whether

the provisions are “entangled” in any way. If they are not, the respondent argues,
                                      Page: 5


then there is no reason why the invalidity of one should impact on the enforceability

of the other.

[10]   We do not give effect to that submission. An employment agreement must

be interpreted as a whole and not on a piecemeal basis. The correct analytical

approach is to determine whether the termination provisions in an employment

agreement read as a whole violate the ESA. Recognizing the power imbalance

between employees and employers, as well as the remedial protections offered by

the ESA, courts should focus on whether the employer has, in restricting an

employee’s common law rights on termination, violated the employee’s ESA rights.

While courts will permit an employer to enforce a rights-restricting contract, they

will not enforce termination provisions that are in whole or in part illegal. In

conducting this analysis, it is irrelevant whether the termination provisions are

found in one place in the agreement or separated, or whether the provisions are

by their terms otherwise linked. Here the motion judge erred because he failed to

read the termination provisions as a whole and instead applied a piecemeal

approach without regard to their combined effect.

[11]   Further, it is of no moment that the respondent ultimately did not rely on the

Termination for Cause provision. The court is obliged to determine the

enforceability of the termination provisions as at the time the agreement was

executed; non-reliance on the illegal provision is irrelevant.
                                      Page: 6


[12]   The mischief associated with an illegal provision is readily identified. Where

an employer does not rely on an illegal termination clause, it may nonetheless gain

the benefit of the illegal clause. For example, an employee who is not familiar with

their rights under the ESA, and who signs a contract that includes unenforceable

termination for cause provisions, may incorrectly believe they must behave in

accordance with these unenforceable provisions in order to avoid termination for

cause. If an employee strives to comply with these overreaching provisions, then

his or her employer may benefit from these illegal provisions even if the employee

is eventually terminated without cause on terms otherwise compliant with the ESA.

[13]   In the alternative, the respondent relies on a severability clause in the

employment contract which reads as follows:

             You agree that if any covenant, term, condition or
             provision of this letter outlining the offer of employment
             with the Company is found to be invalid, illegal or
             incapable of being enforced by a rule of law or public
             policy, all remaining covenants, terms, conditions and
             provisions shall be considered severable and shall
             remain in full force and effect.

[14]   We decline to apply this clause to termination provisions that purport to

contract out of the provisions of the ESA. A severability clause cannot have any

effect on clauses of a contract that have been made void by statute: North v.

Metaswitch Networks Corporation, 2017 ONCA 790, 417 D.L.R. (4th) 429, at para.

44. Having concluded that the Termination for Cause provision and the

Termination of Employment with Notice provision are to be understood together,
                                      Page: 7


the severability clause cannot apply to sever the offending portion of the

termination provisions.

Disposition

[15]   The motion judge’s order is set aside. The only defence the respondent had

to the action and the motion for summary judgment was its reliance on the

Termination of Employment with Notice provision. Accordingly, we order that the

matter be remitted to the motion judge to determine the quantum of the appellant’s

damages and the costs of the action. If the parties cannot agree on the costs of

the appeal, they may file written submissions together with a bill of costs within ten

days of the release of these reasons. Those submissions shall be no more than

three pages in length.

                                                    “S.E. Pepall J.A.”
                                                    “C.W. Hourigan J.A.”
                                                    “L.B. Roberts J.A.”
