                  COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

      CITATION: Schram v. Linwood Management Corporation, 2025 ONCA 337
                                                         DATE: 20250429
                             DOCKET: COA-25-OM-0116 & COA-25-OM-0118

                         Roberts J.A. (Motions Judge)

                                                    DOCKET: COA-25-OM-0116

BETWEEN

                      Michael Schram and Leslie Mitchell

                                            Plaintiffs (Moving Parties/Appellants)

                                      and

 Linwood Management Corporation, Huron Green Incorporated and Corporation
                    of the Municipality of South Huron

                                 Defendants (Responding Parties/Respondents)

                                                    DOCKET: COA-25-OM-0118

AND BETWEEN

                                Michael Schram

                                                 Tenant (Moving Party/Appellant)

                                      And

              Huron Green Inc. c/o Linwood Property Management

                                       Landlord (Responding Party/Respondent)

Michael Schram and Leslie Mitchell, acting in person

Kristin Ley, for the respondent, Huron Green Inc. c/o Linwood Property
Management
                                      Page: 2


Charles Painter and Lauren Furukawa, for the respondent, The Corporation of
the Municipality of South Huron

Heard: April 24, 2025

                                 ENDORSEMENT

[1]   The moving party tenants seek an extension of time to file: 1) a notice of

motion for leave to appeal the March 17, 2025 order of the Divisional Court, which

upheld the termination of their tenancy by the Landlord and Tenant Board (“LTB”);

and 2) a notice of appeal of the February 13, 2025 order of Perfetto J. of the

Superior Court of Justice dismissing their action. If those motions are granted, the

moving parties move also to stay the eviction order and the dismissal of their action

that they wish to appeal.

[2]   The motions were initially returnable before me on an urgent basis on

April 23, 2025 and then adjourned to April 24, 2025, to permit the responding

parties to file responding materials. Given the time exigencies, as the eviction was

scheduled for 8:30 a.m. on April 25, 2025, in a very brief endorsement released on

April 24, 2025, I dismissed the motions, with costs to the responding parties, the

amounts to be determined, for reasons to follow. These are my promised reasons.

[3]   A brief factual background suffices to provide the necessary context. The

moving parties have been long-time tenants of a rental house and land in a land

lease community owned by Huron Green Inc. c/o Linwood Property Management

(“Huron Green Inc.) For many years, the moving parties had a canvas shed in their
                                      Page: 3


backyard which housed their lawnmower and snowblower. Although this shed was

permitted when first erected, the rules of the land lease community changed in

2021 because of safety concerns when in 2018 a canvas shed on another property

blew away. Huron Green Inc. gave several notices to the moving parties to remove

the canvas shed and advised that they were authorized to put up a different shed.

The moving parties refused to do so.

[4]   On May 2, 2022, Huron Green Inc. gave the moving parties a notice of

termination of their tenancy. On May 20, 2022, the moving parties commenced an

action against the responding parties seeking damages of $40,000,000. On

May 24, 2022, Huron Green Inc. brought an application before the LTB to

terminate the moving parties’ tenancy on the basis that their refusal to remove the

canvas shed substantially interfered with its lawful right, privilege or interest

pursuant to s. 64(1) of the Residential Tenancies Act, 2006, S.O. 2006, c. 17

(“RTA”). The LTB allowed the application. On review, the LTB confirmed the

termination of the tenancy. The moving parties appealed to the Divisional Court.

Their appeal was dismissed with costs of $3,000 to Huron Green Inc.

[5]   The overarching consideration in determining whether to grant leave to

extend the time to file a notice of appeal and a notice of motion for leave to appeal

is the same: does the justice of the case warrant the extension. Informing that

consideration are the following oft-cited factors: 1) whether the appellant formed

an intention to appeal within the deadline for appealing; 2) the length of and
                                       Page: 4


explanation for the delay; 3) prejudice to the responding party; and 4) the merits of

the proposed appeal. Lack of merit alone can be a sufficient basis on which to

deny the extension of time, particularly when the moving party seeks an extension

to file a notice of leave to appeal. See Enbridge Gas Distribution Inc. v. Froese,

2013 ONCA 131, at paras. 15, 16; 828343 Ontario Inc. v. Demshe Forge Inc.,

2022 ONCA 412, at paras. 21, 34.

[6]     The moving parties meet the first two criteria. However, as I explain, they

fail to overcome the merit and prejudice factors.

[7]     I acknowledge that in assessing the merits of the proposed appeals, I am

not finally determining them. Rather, I must consider whether the proposed

appeals have so little merit that the appellants should be denied their right to

appeal and seek leave to appeal: Issasi v. Rozenzweig, 2011 ONCA 112, at

para. 10; Pantoja v. Belilla, 2023 ONCA 757, at para. 4. I conclude that is the case

here.

[8]     With respect to the motion for leave to appeal the Divisional Court’s order,

the stringent test for granting appeal was helpfully summarized by Gillese J.A. in

828343 Ontario Inc., at para. 22:

              The Decision was rendered by the Divisional Court
              exercising its appellate jurisdiction. Such decisions are
              intended to be final and a review of them, by this court, is
              an exception to that general rule. Before granting leave,
              this court must be satisfied that the proposed appeal
              presents an arguable question of law, or mixed law and
                                      Page: 5


             fact, that requires the court to consider matters of public
             importance, such as the interpretation of legislation or
             clarification of some general rule or principle of law: Sault
             Dock Co. Ltd. v. Sault Ste. Marie (City), [1973] 2 O.R.
             479 (C.A.), at para. 8. There also may be special
             circumstances that make the matter sought to be brought
             to this court a matter of public importance or involve a
             clear error in the Divisional Court decision that requires
             correct: Sault Dock, at paras, 9-10.

[9]    In my view, the moving parties’ motion for leave to appeal does not meet

this test. The main focus of their appeal is that the LTB and the Divisional Court

erred in finding that the moving parties’ rental unit was part of a land lease

community as defined under the RTA. As a result, they argue, Huron Green Inc.’s

rules requiring them to remove their canvas shed do not apply to them.

[10]   The moving parties’ ground of appeal faces two hurdles. First, as noted by

the LTB on its review and also by the Divisional Court, this ground was not raised

before the LTB. As a result, there was no challenge to Huron Green Inc.’s evidence

that the moving parties’ rented premises formed part of a land lease community

and therefore were subject to the rules enacted by Huron Green Inc. It is well

established that an appeal court will not lightly entertain a new issue on appeal

when it is not simply a legal issue that can be determined on the existing record:

Kaiman v. Graham, 2009 ONCA 77, at para. 18.

[11]   Second, the moving parties’ main ground of appeal is without merit. There

is no ambiguity about the meaning of the RTA provisions regarding rental units

within land lease communities and the authority of the landlord to make rules. As
                                       Page: 6


the Divisional Court stated, the moving parties’ rental unit is located in a land lease

community of about 400 rental units and nineteen “land lease homes”. As the

Divisional Court further noted, s. 2(1) of the RTA defines “land lease community”

to mean the land on which land lease homes are situate “and includes the rental

units and the land, structure, services and facilities of which the landlord retains

possession and that are intended for the common use and enjoyment of the

tenants of the landlords”. There is no issue that the moving parties’ unit is a rental

unit. The Divisional Court correctly stated that the rental unit forms part of a land

lease community. With respect to this court’s confirmation that the land lease

provisions of the RTA apply to the rental units situated within land lease

communities, see, for example: Matthews v. Algoma Timberlakes Corp.,

2010 ONCA 468; North York General Hospital Foundation v. Armstrong (2005),

258 DLR (4th) 85 (Ont. C.A.). The Divisional Court concluded, again correctly in

my view, that “pursuant to s. 154(1) of the RTA, the landlord can enact community

rules provided that proper notice is given to the tenants (which is not disputed).

Here [Huron Green Inc.] enacted a rule about canvas sheds, but [the moving

parties] chooses to disobey.” The moving parties have not raised any arguable

issue that would warrant granting leave to appeal the Divisional Court’s decision.

[12]   The moving parties’ motion for an extension of time to file a notice of appeal

from Perfetto J.’s order is similarly without merit. Perfetto J. determined, correctly

in my view, that the action raised the same or similar issues that were already
                                      Page: 7


determined by or could have been determined by and were within the exclusive

jurisdiction of the LTB. The moving parties also raised s. 15 Charter of Rights and

Freedoms and conspiracy claims. Perfetto J. determined that neither claim was

properly pleaded nor raised a reasonable cause of action and dismissed them.

Again, the moving parties have not raised an arguable issue that would justify

appellate intervention.

[13]   As for the question of prejudice, the delay here is short. However, the safety

issue posed by the ongoing presence of the canvas shed on the property for which

Huron Green Inc. is responsible constitutes prejudice to Huron Green Inc. Although

Mr. Schram advised in his submissions that he has removed the canvas shed in

issue because it fell down, he stated his intention to erect another canvas shed.

The expenditure of further time and resources by Huron Green Inc. and of time

and public resources by a municipal corporation to respond to meritless appeals

also constitutes prejudice: Pantoja, at para. 13.

[14]   Accordingly, I concluded that the justice of the case did not warrant granting

the extensions and dismissed the extension motions. As the extension motions

were dismissed and no appeals are extant, there is no basis for me to grant a stay:

see rule 63.02(1)(b) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194.

[15]   Even if there were, I would not have granted the requested stay substantially

for the reasons refusing the extension motion: there is no serious issue to be tried
                                     Page: 8


because the moving parties have not raised arguable issues; they have not

persuaded me that they would suffer irreparable harm in that they have known of

the eviction for some time and have not provided any evidence that they could not

seek accommodation elsewhere; and the balance of convenience favours the

responding parties because of the safety concerns and the waste of public

resources on meritless appeals. The motion for a stay is therefore dismissed.

[16]   The responding parties are entitled to their all-inclusive costs of these

motions from the moving parties as follows:

   1. To Huron Green Inc.: $2,500;

   2. To the Corporation for the Municipality of Huron: $2,000.

                                                                  “L.B. Roberts J.A.”
