Divorce Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp.) — child support order and variation
Source: https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/D-3.4/FullText.html
Act current to 2026-07-21, last amended 2024-02-01.
Retrieved 2026-09-15. HTML stripped and re-wrapped; wording unaltered.

THIS IS THE MARRIED-SPOUSES PATH. Where the parties were never married to each
other, Ontario's Family Law Act s. 33 applies instead and the table is
O. Reg. 391/97, not the federal SOR/97-175. See the two-table warning in
federal-child-support-guidelines.txt.

s. 15.1 (7) and (8), and their variation twins s. 17 (6.4) and (6.5), are the
consent-order provisions: a court may award an amount different from the
Guidelines on consent if reasonable arrangements have been made, and shall NOT
treat arrangements as unreasonable SOLELY because the agreed amount differs from
the Guidelines amount.

s. 17 (4) is the variation threshold: before varying a child support order the
court must satisfy itself that a change of circumstances as provided for in the
applicable guidelines has occurred.
======================================================================

---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
s. 15.1 — child support order, and the consent-order exception
---------------------------------------------------------------------- 

Child Support Orders

Marginal note: Child support order 15.1   (1)  A court of competent
jurisdiction may, on application by either or both spouses, make an order
requiring a spouse to pay for the support of any or all children of the
marriage.

Marginal note: Interim order (2)  Where an application is made under
subsection (1), the court may, on application by either or both spouses, make
an interim order requiring a spouse to pay for the support of any or all
children of the marriage, pending the determination of the application under
subsection (1).

Marginal note: Guidelines apply (3)  A court making an order under subsection
(1) or an interim order under subsection (2) shall do so in accordance with
the applicable guidelines.

Marginal note: Terms and conditions (4)  The court may make an order under
subsection (1) or an interim order under subsection (2) for a definite or
indefinite period or until a specified event occurs, and may impose terms,
conditions or restrictions in connection with the order or interim order as it
thinks fit and just.

Marginal note: Court may take agreement, etc., into account (5) 
Notwithstanding subsection (3), a court may award an amount that is different
from the amount that would be determined in accordance with the applicable
guidelines if the court is satisfied (a)  that special provisions in an order,
a judgment or a written agreement respecting the financial obligations of the
spouses, or the division or transfer of their property, directly or indirectly
benefit a child, or that special provisions have otherwise been made for the
benefit of a child; and (b)  that the application of the applicable guidelines
would result in an amount of child support that is inequitable given those
special provisions.

Marginal note: Reasons (6)  Where the court awards, pursuant to subsection
(5), an amount that is different from the amount that would be determined in
accordance with the applicable guidelines, the court shall record its reasons
for having done so.

Marginal note: Consent orders (7)  Notwithstanding subsection (3), a court may
award an amount that is different from the amount that would be determined in
accordance with the applicable guidelines on the consent of both spouses if it
is satisfied that reasonable arrangements have been made for the support of
the child to whom the order relates.

Marginal note: Reasonable arrangements (8)  For the purposes of subsection
(7), in determining whether reasonable arrangements have been made for the
support of a child, the court shall have regard to the applicable guidelines.
However, the court shall not consider the arrangements to be unreasonable
solely because the amount of support agreed to is not the same as the amount
that would otherwise have been determined in accordance with the applicable
guidelines. 1997, c. 1, s. 2

---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
s. 17 — variation, rescission or suspension of orders
---------------------------------------------------------------------- 

Variation, Rescission or Suspension of Orders

Marginal note: Variation order 17   (1)  A court of competent jurisdiction may
make an order varying, rescinding or suspending, retroactively or
prospectively, (a)  a support order or any provision of one, on application by
either or both former spouses; (b)  a parenting order or any provision of one,
on application by (i)  either or both former spouses, or (ii)  a person, other
than a former spouse, who is a parent of the child, stands in the place of a
parent or intends to stand in the place of a parent; or (c)  a contact order
or any provision of one, on application by a person to whom the order relates.

Marginal note: Leave of the court (2)  A person to whom the parenting order in
question does not relate may make an application under subparagraph (1)(b)(ii)
only with leave of the court.

Marginal note: Variation of parenting order (2.1)  If the court makes a
variation order in respect of a contact order, it may make an order varying
the parenting order to take into account that variation order, and subsections
(3) and (11) apply as a consequence with any necessary modifications.

Marginal note: Variation of contact order (2.2)  If the court makes a
variation order in respect of a parenting order, it may make an order varying
any contact order to take into account that variation order, and subsections
(3) and (11) apply as a consequence with any necessary modifications.

Marginal note: Conditions of order (3)  The court may include in a variation
order any provision that under this Act could have been included in the order
in respect of which the variation order is sought, and the court has the same
powers and obligations that it would have when making that order.

Marginal note: Factors for child support order (4)  Before the court makes a
variation order in respect of a child support order, the court shall satisfy
itself that a change of circumstances as provided for in the applicable
guidelines has occurred since the making of the child support order or the
last variation order made in respect of that order.

Marginal note: Factors for spousal support order (4.1)  Before the court makes
a variation order in respect of a spousal support order, the court shall
satisfy itself that a change in the condition, means, needs or other
circumstances of either former spouse has occurred since the making of the
spousal support order or the last variation order made in respect of that
order, and, in making the variation order, the court shall take that change
into consideration.

Marginal note: Factors for parenting order or contact order (5)  Before the
court makes a variation order in respect of a parenting order or contact
order, the court shall satisfy itself that there has been a change in the
circumstances of the child since the making of the order or the last variation
order made in respect of the order, or of an order made under subsection
16.5(9).

Marginal note: Variation order (5.1)  For the purposes of subsection (5), a
former spouse’s terminal illness or critical condition shall be considered a
change in the circumstances of the child, and the court shall make a variation
order in respect of a parenting order with regard to the allocation of
parenting time.

Marginal note: Relocation — change in circumstances (5.2)  The relocation of a
child is deemed to constitute a change in the circumstances of the child for
the purposes of subsection (5).

Marginal note: Relocation prohibited — no change in circumstances (5.3)  A
relocation of a child that has been prohibited by a court under paragraph
(1)(b) or section 16.1 does not, in itself, constitute a change in the
circumstances of the child for the purposes of subsection (5).

Marginal note: Conduct (6)  In making a variation order, the court shall not
take into consideration any conduct that under this Act could not have been
considered in making the order in respect of which the variation order is
sought.

Marginal note: Guidelines apply (6.1)  A court making a variation order in
respect of a child support order shall do so in accordance with the applicable
guidelines.

Marginal note: Court may take agreement, etc., into account (6.2) 
Notwithstanding subsection (6.1), in making a variation order in respect of a
child support order, a court may award an amount that is different from the
amount that would be determined in accordance with the applicable guidelines
if the court is satisfied (a)  that special provisions in an order, a judgment
or a written agreement respecting the financial obligations of the spouses, or
the division or transfer of their property, directly or indirectly benefit a
child, or that special provisions have otherwise been made for the benefit of
a child; and (b)  that the application of the applicable guidelines would
result in an amount of child support that is inequitable given those special
provisions.

Marginal note: Reasons (6.3)  Where the court awards, pursuant to subsection
(6.2), an amount that is different from the amount that would be determined in
accordance with the applicable guidelines, the court shall record its reasons
for having done so.

Marginal note: Consent orders (6.4)  Notwithstanding subsection (6.1), a court
may award an amount that is different from the amount that would be determined
in accordance with the applicable guidelines on the consent of both spouses if
it is satisfied that reasonable arrangements have been made for the support of
the child to whom the order relates.

Marginal note: Reasonable arrangements (6.5)  For the purposes of subsection
(6.4), in determining whether reasonable arrangements have been made for the
support of a child, the court shall have regard to the applicable guidelines.
However, the court shall not consider the arrangements to be unreasonable
solely because the amount of support agreed to is not the same as the amount
that would otherwise have been determined in accordance with the applicable
guidelines.

Marginal note: Priority to child support (6.6)  Section 15.3 applies, with any
necessary modifications, when a court is considering an application under
paragraph (1)(a) in respect of a child support order and an application under
that paragraph in respect of a spousal support order.

Marginal note: Objectives of variation order varying spousal support order (7)
 A variation order varying a spousal support order should (a)  recognize any
economic advantages or disadvantages to the former spouses arising from the
marriage or its breakdown; (b)  apportion between the former spouses any
financial consequences arising from the care of any child of the marriage over
and above any obligation for the support of any child of the marriage; (c) 
relieve any economic hardship of the former spouses arising from the breakdown
of the marriage; and (d)  in so far as practicable, promote the economic
self-sufficiency of each former spouse within a reasonable period of time. (8)
  [Repealed, 1997, c. 1, s. 5] (9)   [Repealed, 2019, c. 16, s. 13]

Marginal note: Limitation (10)  Notwithstanding subsection (1), where a
spousal support order provides for support for a definite period or until a
specified event occurs, a court may not, on an application instituted after
the expiration of that period or the occurrence of the event, make a variation
order for the purpose of resuming that support unless the court is satisfied
that (a)  a variation order is necessary to relieve economic hardship arising
from a change described in subsection (4.1) that is related to the marriage;
and (b)  the changed circumstances, had they existed at the time of the making
of the spousal support order or the last variation order made in respect of
that order, as the case may be, would likely have resulted in a different
order.

Marginal note: Copy of order (11)  Where a court makes a variation order in
respect of a support order, parenting order or contact order made by another
court, it shall send a copy of the variation order, certified by a judge or
officer of the court, to that other court. R.S., 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp.), s. 17
1997, c. 1, s. 5 2007, c. 14, s. 1 2019, c. 16, s. 13

17.1   [Repealed, 2019, c. 16, s. 14]

Proceedings Between Provinces and Between a Province and a Designated
Jurisdiction To Obtain, Vary, Rescind or Suspend Support Orders or To
Recognize Decisions of Designated Jurisdictions Definitions

Marginal note: Definitions 18  The following definitions apply in this section
and in sections 18.1 to 19.1. competent authority competent authority  means a
court that has the authority to make an order or another entity that has the
authority to make a decision with respect to support under this Act. (
autorité compétente ) designated authority designated authority  means a
person or entity that is designated by a province to exercise the powers or
perform the duties and functions set out in sections 18.1 to 19.1 within the
province. ( autorité désignée ) designated jurisdiction designated
jurisdiction  means a jurisdiction outside Canada — whether a country or a
political subdivision of a country — that is designated under an Act that
relates to the reciprocal enforcement of orders relating to support, of the
province in which either of the former spouses resides. ( État désigné )
responsible authority responsible authority  means a person or entity that, in
a designated jurisdiction, performs functions that are similar to those
performed by the designated authority under subsection 19(4). ( autorité
responsable ) R.S., 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp.), s. 18 1993, c. 8, s. 3, c. 28, s.
78 2002, c. 7, s. 159 2014, c. 2, s. 33 2019, c. 16, s. 14

