
Français
               Arthur Wishart Act (Franchise Disclosure), 2000

                            S.O. 2000, chapteR 3

CONSOLIDATION PERIOD: FROM SEPTEMBER 1, 2020 TO THE E-LAWS CURRENCY DATE.

Last amendment: 2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 1-4.

Legislative History: 2001, c. 9, Sched. D, s. 1; 2009, c. 33, Sched. 10,  s.
1; 2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 1-4.

Definitions
1 (1)  In this Act,
“disclosure document” means the disclosure document required by  section  5;
 (“document d’information”)
“franchise” means a right to engage in a business where  the  franchisee  is
 required by  contract  or  otherwise  to  make  a  payment  or  continuing
 payments, whether direct or indirect, or a commitment to make such payment
 or payments, to the franchisor, or  the  franchisor’s  associate,  in  the
 course of operating the business  or  as  a  condition  of  acquiring  the
 franchise or commencing operations and,
      (a)   in which,
      (i)   the franchisor grants the franchisee the right  to  sell,  offer
       for sale or distribute goods  or  services  that  are  substantially
       associated with a trade-mark, trade name,  logo  or  advertising  or
       other commercial  symbol  that  is  owned  by  or  licensed  to  the
       franchisor or the franchisor’s associate, and
      (ii)  the franchisor or the franchisor’s associate has  the  right  to
       exercise or exercises significant control over, or has the right  to
       provide or provides  significant  assistance  in,  the  franchisee’s
       method of operation,  including  building  design  and  furnishings,
       locations, business organization, marketing techniques or  training,
       or
      (b)   in which,
      (i)   the  franchisor,  or  the  franchisor’s  associate,  grants  the
       franchisee the representational or distribution rights,  whether  or
       not  a  trade-mark,  trade  name,  logo  or  advertising  or   other
       commercial symbol is involved, to sell, offer for sale or distribute
       goods  or  services  supplied  by  the  franchisor  or  a   supplier
       designated by the franchisor, and
      (ii)  the franchisor,  or  the  franchisor’s  associate,  or  a  third
       person designated by the franchisor, provides  location  assistance,
       including securing retail outlets  or  accounts  for  the  goods  or
       services to be sold, offered for sale  or  distributed  or  securing
       locations or sites for vending  machines,  display  racks  or  other
       product sales displays used by the franchisee; (“franchise”)
“franchise agreement” means  any  agreement  that  relates  to  a  franchise
 between,
      (a)   a franchisor or franchisor’s associate, and
      (b)   a franchisee; (“contrat de franchisage”)
“franchisee” means a person to whom a franchise is granted and includes,
       (a)    a  subfranchisor   with   regard   to   that   subfranchisor’s
    relationship with a franchisor, and
       (b)    a  subfranchisee   with   regard   to   that   subfranchisee’s
    relationship with a subfranchisor; (“franchisé”)
“franchise system” includes,
       (a)    the  marketing,  marketing  plan  or  business  plan  of   the
    franchise,
      (b)   the use of or association with a trade-mark,  trade  name,  logo
    or advertising or other commercial symbol,
      (c)   the obligations of the franchisor and franchisee with regard  to
    the operation of the business operated  by  the  franchisee  under  the
    franchise agreement, and
      (d)    the  goodwill  associated  with  the  franchise;  (“système  de
    franchise”)
“franchisor” means one or more  persons  who  grant  or  offer  to  grant  a
 franchise and includes a subfranchisor with regard to that subfranchisor’s
 relationship with a subfranchisee; (“franchiseur”)
“franchisor’s associate” means a person,
      (a)   who, directly or indirectly,
      (i)   controls or is controlled by the franchisor, or
      (ii)  is controlled by another person who also controls,  directly  or
       indirectly, the franchisor, and
      (b)   who,
      (i)   is directly involved in the grant of the franchise,
      (A)   by being involved in reviewing or approving  the  grant  of  the
           franchise, or
      (B)   by making  representations  to  the  prospective  franchisee  on
           behalf of  the  franchisor  for  the  purpose  of  granting  the
           franchise, marketing the  franchise  or  otherwise  offering  to
           grant the franchise, or
      (ii)  exercises significant operational control  over  the  franchisee
       and to whom the franchisee has a continuing financial obligation  in
       respect of the franchise; (“personne qui a un lien”)
“grant”, in respect of a franchise, includes the sale or disposition of  the
 franchise or of an interest in the franchise and, for  such  purposes,  an
 interest in  the  franchise  includes  the  ownership  of  shares  in  the
 corporation that owns the franchise; (“concession”)
“master franchise”  means  a  franchise  which  is  a  right  granted  by  a
 franchisor to a subfranchisor to grant or offer to  grant  franchises  for
 the subfranchisor’s own account; (“franchise maîtresse”)
“material change” means a change in the  business,  operations,  capital  or
 control of the franchisor or  franchisor’s  associate,  a  change  in  the
 franchise system or a prescribed change, that would reasonably be expected
 to have a significant  adverse  effect  on  the  value  or  price  of  the
 franchise to be granted or on the decision to acquire  the  franchise  and
 includes a decision to implement such  a  change  made  by  the  board  of
 directors of  the  franchisor  or  franchisor’s  associate  or  by  senior
 management of the franchisor or franchisor’s associate  who  believe  that
 confirmation of the decision  by  the  board  of  directors  is  probable;
 (“changement important”)
“material fact” includes any information  about  the  business,  operations,
 capital or control of the franchisor or franchisor’s associate,  or  about
 the franchise  system,  that  would  reasonably  be  expected  to  have  a
 significant effect on the value or price of the franchise to be granted or
 the decision to acquire the franchise; (“fait important”)
“misrepresentation” includes,
      (a)   an untrue statement of a material fact, or
      (b)   an omission to state a material fact  that  is  required  to  be
    stated or that is necessary to make a statement not misleading  in  the
    light of  the  circumstances  in  which  it  was  made;  (“présentation
    inexacte des faits”)
“prescribed”  means  prescribed  by  regulations  made   under   this   Act;
 (“prescrit”)
“prospective franchisee” means a  person  who  has  indicated,  directly  or
 indirectly, to a franchisor or a franchisor’s associate, agent  or  broker
 an interest in entering into a franchise agreement, and a  person  whom  a
 franchisor or a franchisor’s  associate,  agent  or  broker,  directly  or
 indirectly, invites to  enter  into  a  franchise  agreement;  (“franchisé
 éventuel”)
“subfranchise”  means  a  franchise  granted  by  a   subfranchisor   to   a
 subfranchisee. (“sous-franchise”)   2000,  c. 3,  s. 1 (1);  2009,  c. 33,
 Sched. 10, s. 1 (1); 2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 1.

Master franchise, subfranchise
(2)  A franchise includes a master  franchise  and  a  subfranchise.   2000,
c. 3, s. 1 (2).

Deemed control
(3)  A  franchisee,  franchisor  or  franchisor’s  associate  which   is   a
corporation shall be deemed to be controlled by another  person  or  persons
if,
       (a)    voting  securities  of  the  franchisee   or   franchisor   or
    franchisor’s associate carrying more than 50 per cent of the votes  for
    the election of directors are held, otherwise than by way  of  security
    only, by or for the benefit of the other person or persons; and
       (b)    the  votes  carried  by  such  securities  are  entitled,   if
    exercised, to elect a  majority  of  the  board  of  directors  of  the
    franchisee  or  franchisor  or  franchisor’s  associate.   2000,  c. 3,
    s. 1 (3).
Section Amendments with date in force (d/m/y)
2009, c. 33, Sched. 10, s. 1 (1) - 15/12/2009
2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 1 (1-3) - 14/11/2017

Application
2 (1)  This Act applies with respect to a franchise agreement  entered  into
on or after the coming into  force  of  this  section,  with  respect  to  a
renewal or extension of a franchise agreement entered into before  or  after
the coming into force of  this  section  and  with  respect  to  a  business
operated under such an agreement,  renewal  or  extension  if  the  business
operated by the franchisee under the franchise agreement or its  renewal  or
extension is to be operated  partly  or  wholly  in  Ontario.   2000,  c. 3,
s. 2 (1).

Same
(2)  Sections 3 and 4, clause 5 (7) (d) and sections  9,  11  and  12  apply
with respect to a franchise agreement entered into before  the  coming  into
force of this section, and with respect to a business  operated  under  such
agreement, if the business operated by the franchisee  under  the  franchise
agreement is operated or is to be operated  partly  or  wholly  in  Ontario.
2000, c. 3, s. 2 (2).

Non-application
(3)  This  Act  does  not  apply  to  the  following  continuing  commercial
relationships or arrangements:
      1.    Employer-employee relationship.
      2.    Partnership.
      3.    Membership in a co-operative association, as prescribed.
      4.    An arrangement arising from an agreement to  use  a  trade-mark,
    trade name, logo or advertising or other commercial symbol  designating
    a person who offers on a general basis, for  consideration,  a  service
    for the evaluation, testing or certification of goods,  commodities  or
    services.
      5.    An arrangement arising from an agreement between a licensor  and
    a single licensee to license a specific trade-mark, trade name, logo or
    advertising or other commercial symbol where the licence  is  the  only
    one of its general nature and type to be granted  by  the  licensor  in
    Canada with respect to that trade-mark, trade name, logo or advertising
    or other commercial symbol.
      6.    An arrangement arising  out  of  a  lease,  licence  or  similar
    agreement whereby the  franchisee  leases  space  in  the  premises  of
    another retailer and is not required or advised to  buy  the  goods  or
    services it sells from the retailer or an affiliate of the retailer.
      7.    A relationship or arrangement arising out of an  oral  agreement
    where there is no writing which evidences any material term  or  aspect
    of the relationship or arrangement.
      8.    A service contract or franchise-like arrangement with the  Crown
    or an agent of the Crown.  2000, c. 3, s. 2 (3); 2017, c. 20, Sched. 9,
    s. 2.
Section Amendments with date in force (d/m/y)
2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 2 (1, 2) - 14/11/2017

Fair dealing
3 (1)  Every franchise agreement imposes  on  each  party  a  duty  of  fair
dealing in its performance and enforcement.  2000, c. 3, s. 3 (1).

Right of action
(2)  A party to a franchise agreement has a  right  of  action  for  damages
against another party to the franchise agreement who breaches  the  duty  of
fair dealing in the performance or enforcement of the  franchise  agreement.
2000, c. 3, s. 3 (2).

Interpretation
(3)  For the purpose of this section, the duty of fair dealing includes  the
duty to act in good faith  and  in  accordance  with  reasonable  commercial
standards.  2000, c. 3, s. 3 (3).

Right to associate
4 (1)  A franchisee may associate with other franchisees  and  may  form  or
join an organization of franchisees.  2000, c. 3, s. 4 (1).

Franchisor may not prohibit association
(2)  A franchisor and a franchisor’s associate  shall  not  interfere  with,
prohibit or restrict, by contract or otherwise, a  franchisee  from  forming
or joining an organization of franchisees or  from  associating  with  other
franchisees.  2000, c. 3, s. 4 (2).

Same
(3)  A  franchisor  and  franchisor’s  associate  shall  not,  directly   or
indirectly,  penalize,  attempt  to  penalize  or  threaten  to  penalize  a
franchisee for  exercising  any  right  under  this  section.   2000,  c. 3,
s. 4 (3).

Provisions void
(4)  Any provision in a franchise agreement or other agreement  relating  to
a franchise which  purports  to  interfere  with,  prohibit  or  restrict  a
franchisee from exercising any right under  this  section  is  void.   2000,
c. 3, s. 4 (4).

Right of action
(5)  If a franchisor or franchisor’s  associate  contravenes  this  section,
the franchisee has a right of action for damages against the  franchisor  or
franchisor’s associate, as the case may be.  2000, c. 3, s. 4 (5).

Franchisor’s obligation to disclose
5  (1)  A  franchisor  shall  provide  a  prospective  franchisee   with   a
disclosure  document  and  the  prospective  franchisee  shall  receive  the
disclosure document not less than 14 days before the earlier of,
      (a)   the signing by  the  prospective  franchisee  of  the  franchise
    agreement or any other agreement relating to the franchise, other  than
    an agreement described in subsection (1.1); and
      (b)   the payment  of  any  consideration  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    prospective franchisee to  the  franchisor  or  franchisor’s  associate
    relating to the franchise, excluding the payment of a deposit if it,
      (i)   does not exceed the prescribed amount,
      (ii)  is refundable without any deductions, and
       (iii)  is  given  under  an  agreement  that  in  no  way  binds  the
       prospective franchisee to enter into a  franchise  agreement.  2000,
       c. 3, s. 5 (1); 2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 3 (1).

Exception
(1.1)  Clauses (1) (a) and (5) (a) do not apply to an agreement if  it  only
contains terms that,
      (a)   require any information or material that may be  provided  to  a
    prospective franchisee to be kept confidential;
      (b)   prohibit the use of any information  or  material  that  may  be
    provided to a prospective franchisee; or
      (c)   designate a  location,  site  or  territory  for  a  prospective
    franchisee. 2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 3 (2).

Same
(1.2)  Despite subsection (1.1), clauses (1) (a) and (5)  (a)  apply  to  an
agreement if it contains terms that,
      (a)   require information to be kept confidential or prohibit the  use
    of information, if the information,
      (i)   is or comes into the public domain other than as a result  of  a
       contravention of the agreement,
      (ii)  is disclosed  to  any  person  other  than  as  a  result  of  a
       contravention of the agreement, or
      (iii) is disclosed  with  the  consent  of  all  the  parties  to  the
       agreement; or
      (b)   prohibit the disclosure of information  to  an  organization  of
    franchisees, other franchisees  of  the  same  franchise  system  or  a
    franchisee’s professional advisors. 2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 3 (2).

Methods of delivery
(2)  A disclosure document may be delivered personally, by  registered  mail
or by any other prescribed method. 2000, c. 3, s. 5 (2).

Same
(3)  A disclosure document must  be  one  document,  delivered  as  required
under subsections (1) and (2) as one  document  at  one  time.  2000,  c. 3,
s. 5 (3).

Contents of disclosure document
(4)  The disclosure document shall contain,
      (a)   all material facts, including material facts as prescribed;
      (b)   financial statements as prescribed;
       (c)    copies  of  all  proposed  franchise  agreements   and   other
    agreements relating to the franchise to be signed  by  the  prospective
    franchisee;
      (d)   statements as prescribed  for  the  purposes  of  assisting  the
    prospective franchisee in making informed investment decisions; and
      (e)   other information and copies of documents as  prescribed.  2000,
    c. 3, s. 5 (4).

Material change
(5)  The franchisor shall provide the prospective franchisee with a  written
statement of any material change,  and  the  franchisee  must  receive  such
statement, as soon as practicable after the change has occurred  and  before
the earlier of,
      (a)   the signing by  the  prospective  franchisee  of  the  franchise
    agreement or any other agreement relating to the franchise, other  than
    an agreement described in subsection (1.1); and
      (b)   the payment  of  any  consideration  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    prospective franchisee to  the  franchisor  or  franchisor’s  associate
    relating to the franchise, excluding the payment of a deposit if it,
      (i)   does not exceed the prescribed amount,
      (ii)  is refundable without any deductions, and
       (iii)  is  given  under  an  agreement  that  in  no  way  binds  the
       prospective franchisee to enter into a  franchise  agreement.  2000,
       c. 3, s. 5 (5); 2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 3 (3).

Contents of statement
(5.1)  A statement of material change shall contain the information that  is
prescribed. 2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 3 (4).

Information to be accurate, clear, concise
(6)  All information in a disclosure document and a statement of a  material
change shall be accurately, clearly  and  concisely  set  out.  2000,  c. 3,
s. 5 (6).

Exemptions
(7)  This section does not apply to,
      (a)   the grant of a franchise by a franchisee if,
      (i)   the franchisee is  not  the  franchisor,  an  associate  of  the
       franchisor or a director, officer or employee of the  franchisor  or
       of the franchisor’s associate,
      (ii)  the grant of the franchise is for the franchisee’s own account,
      (iii) in the case of a  master  franchise,  the  entire  franchise  is
       granted, and
      (iv)  the grant of the franchise is not effected  by  or  through  the
       franchisor;
      (b)   the grant of a franchise  to  a  person  for  the  person’s  own
    account or to a corporation that the person controls if the person,
      (i)   has been an officer or director of  the  franchisor  or  of  the
       franchisor’s associate for at least six months and is currently such
       an officer or director, or
      (ii)  was  an  officer  or  director  of  the  franchisor  or  of  the
       franchisor’s associate for at least six months  and  not  more  than
       four months have passed since the person  was  such  an  officer  or
       director;
      (c)   the grant of an additional franchise to an  existing  franchisee
    if that additional franchise is substantially the same as the  existing
    franchise that the franchisee is operating and if  there  has  been  no
    material change  since  the  existing  franchise  agreement  or  latest
    renewal or extension of the existing franchise  agreement  was  entered
    into;
      (d)    the  grant  of  a  franchise  by  an  executor,  administrator,
    sheriff, receiver, trustee, trustee in bankruptcy or guardian on behalf
    of a person other than the franchisor or the estate of the franchisor;
      (e)   the grant of a franchise to a person to sell goods  or  services
    within a business in which that person has an  interest  if  the  sales
    arising from those goods or services during the first year of operation
    of the franchise, as anticipated by  the  parties  or  that  should  be
    anticipated by the parties at  the  time  the  franchise  agreement  is
    entered into, do not exceed, in relation to  the  total  sales  of  the
    business during that year, a prescribed percentage;
      (f)   the renewal or extension of a franchise  agreement  where  there
    has been no interruption in the operation of the business  operated  by
    the franchisee under the franchise agreement  and  there  has  been  no
    material change since the franchise  agreement  or  latest  renewal  or
    extension of the franchise agreement was entered into;
      (g)   the grant of a franchise if,
      (i)   the prospective franchisee is required to make a  total  initial
       investment, determined in the prescribed manner, of an  amount  that
       does not exceed a prescribed amount,
      (ii)  the franchise agreement is not valid for longer  than  one  year
       and does not involve the payment of a non-refundable franchise  fee,
       or
      (iii) the franchisor is governed by section 55 of the Competition  Act
       (Canada);
      (h)   the grant of  a  franchise  if  the  prospective  franchisee  is
    required  to  make  a  total  initial  investment,  determined  in  the
    prescribed manner, of an amount  that  is  greater  than  a  prescribed
    amount. 2000, c. 3, s. 5 (7); 2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 3 (5-8).

Same
(8)  For the purpose of subclause (7) (a) (iv), a grant is not  effected  by
or through a franchisor merely because,
      (a)   the franchisor has a right, exercisable on  reasonable  grounds,
    to approve or disapprove the grant; or
      (b)   a transfer fee must be paid to the franchisor in an  amount  set
    out in the franchise agreement or in an amount that does not exceed the
    reasonable actual costs incurred  by  the  franchisor  to  process  the
    grant.  2000, c. 3, s. 5 (8).
Section Amendments with date in force (d/m/y)
2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 3 (1-8) - 01/09/2020

Rescission for late disclosure
6 (1)  A franchisee may rescind the franchise agreement, without penalty  or
obligation, no later than 60 days after receiving the  disclosure  document,
if the franchisor failed to provide the disclosure document or  a  statement
of material change within the time required by section 5 or if the  contents
of the disclosure document did not  meet  the  requirements  of  section  5.
2000, c. 3, s. 6 (1).

Rescission for no disclosure
(2)  A franchisee may rescind the franchise agreement,  without  penalty  or
obligation, no later than  two  years  after  entering  into  the  franchise
agreement if the franchisor never provided the disclosure  document.   2000,
c. 3, s. 6 (2).

Notice of rescission
(3)  Notice of rescission shall be in writing and shall be delivered to  the
franchisor,  personally,  by  registered  mail,  by  fax  or  by  any  other
prescribed method, at the franchisor’s address for service or to  any  other
person designated for that purpose in the franchise agreement.  2000,  c. 3,
s. 6 (3).

Effective date of rescission
(4)  The notice of rescission is effective,
      (a)   on the day it is delivered personally;
      (b)   on the fifth day after it was mailed;
      (c)   on the day it is sent by fax, if sent before 5 p.m.;
      (d)   on the day after it was sent by fax,  if  sent  at  or  after  5
    p.m.;
      (e)   on the day determined in accordance  with  the  regulations,  if
    sent by a prescribed method of delivery.  2000, c. 3, s. 6 (4).

Same
(5)  If the day described in clause (4) (b), (c) or (d) is  a  holiday,  the
notice of rescission is effective on the next day that  is  not  a  holiday.
2000, c. 3, s. 6 (5).

Franchisor’s obligations on rescission
(6)  The franchisor, or franchisor’s associate, as the case may  be,  shall,
within 60 days of the effective date of the rescission,
      (a)   refund to the franchisee any money received from  or  on  behalf
    of  the  franchisee,  other  than  money  for  inventory,  supplies  or
    equipment;
      (b)   purchase from the franchisee any inventory that  the  franchisee
    had purchased pursuant to the franchise agreement and remaining at  the
    effective date of rescission, at a price equal to  the  purchase  price
    paid by the franchisee;
      (c)   purchase from the franchisee any  supplies  and  equipment  that
    the franchisee had purchased pursuant to the franchise agreement, at  a
    price equal to the purchase price paid by the franchisee; and
      (d)   compensate the franchisee for any  losses  that  the  franchisee
    incurred in acquiring, setting up and operating the franchise, less the
    amounts set out in clauses (a) to (c).  2000, c. 3, s. 6 (6).

Damages for misrepresentation, failure to disclose
7 (1)  If a  franchisee  suffers  a  loss  because  of  a  misrepresentation
contained in the disclosure document or in a statement of a material  change
or as a result of the  franchisor’s  failure  to  comply  in  any  way  with
section 5, the franchisee has a right of action for damages against,
      (a)   the franchisor;
      (b)   the franchisor’s agent;
       (c)    the  franchisor’s  broker,  being  a  person  other  than  the
    franchisor, franchisor’s associate, franchisor’s agent  or  franchisee,
    who grants, markets or otherwise offers to grant a  franchise,  or  who
    arranges for the grant of a franchise;
      (d)   the franchisor’s associate; and
      (e)   every person who signed the disclosure document or statement  of
    material change. 2000, c. 3, s. 7 (1).

Deemed reliance on misrepresentation
(2)  If a disclosure document or statement of  material  change  contains  a
misrepresentation, a franchisee  who  acquired  a  franchise  to  which  the
disclosure document or statement of material change relates shall be  deemed
to have relied on the misrepresentation.  2000, c. 3, s. 7 (2).

Deemed reliance on disclosure document
(3)  If a franchisor failed to comply with  section  5  with  respect  to  a
statement of material change, a  franchisee  who  acquired  a  franchise  to
which the material change relates shall be deemed  to  have  relied  on  the
information set out in the disclosure document.  2000, c. 3, s. 7 (3).

Defence
(4)  A  person  is  not  liable  in  an  action  under  this   section   for
misrepresentation if the person proves  that  the  franchisee  acquired  the
franchise with  knowledge  of  the  misrepresentation  or  of  the  material
change, as the case may be. 2000, c. 3, s. 7 (4).

Same
(5)  A person, other than a franchisor, is not liable  in  an  action  under
this section for misrepresentation if the person proves,
      (a)   that the disclosure document or  statement  of  material  change
    was given to the franchisee without the person’s knowledge  or  consent
    and that, on becoming aware  of  its  having  been  given,  the  person
    promptly gave written notice  to  the  franchisee  that  it  was  given
    without that person’s knowledge or consent;
      (b)   that, after the disclosure document  or  statement  of  material
    change was given  to  the  franchisee  and  before  the  franchise  was
    acquired by the franchisee, on becoming aware of any  misrepresentation
    in the disclosure document or statement of material change, the  person
    withdrew consent to it and gave written notice to the franchisee of the
    withdrawal and the reasons for it; or
      (c)   that, with respect to any part of  the  disclosure  document  or
    statement of material change purporting to be made on the authority  of
    an expert or purporting to be a copy of or an extract  from  a  report,
    opinion or statement of an expert, the person had no reasonable grounds
    to believe and did not believe that,
      (i)   there had been a misrepresentation,
      (ii)  the part of the disclosure document  or  statement  of  material
       change did not fairly represent the report, opinion or statement  of
       the expert, or
      (iii) the part of the disclosure document  or  statement  of  material
       change was not a fair copy of or extract from the report, opinion or
       statement of the expert.  2000, c. 3, s. 7 (5).

Joint and several liability
8 (1)  All or any one or more of the parties to a  franchise  agreement  who
are found to be liable in an action under subsection  3 (2)  or  who  accept
liability with respect to  an  action  brought  under  that  subsection  are
jointly and severally liable.  2000, c. 3, s. 8 (1).

Same
(2)  All or any one or more of a franchisor or franchisor’s  associates  who
are found to be liable in an action under subsection  4 (5)  or  who  accept
liability with respect to  an  action  brought  under  that  subsection  are
jointly and severally liable.  2000, c. 3, s. 8 (2).

Same
(3)  All or any one or more of the persons specified  in  subsection  7  (1)
who are found to be liable in an action under that subsection or who  accept
liability with respect to  an  action  brought  under  that  subsection  are
jointly and severally liable.  2000, c. 3, s. 8 (3).

No derogation of other rights
9 The rights conferred by this Act are in addition to and  do  not  derogate
from any other right or remedy a franchisee or franchisor may have  at  law.
2000, c. 3, s. 9.

Attempt to affect jurisdiction void
10 Any provision  in  a  franchise  agreement  purporting  to  restrict  the
application of the law of Ontario or to restrict jurisdiction or venue to  a
forum outside Ontario is void with respect to a claim otherwise  enforceable
under this Act in Ontario.  2000, c. 3, s. 10.

Rights cannot be waived
11 Any purported waiver or release by a franchisee of a  right  given  under
this Act or of an obligation or  requirement  imposed  on  a  franchisor  or
franchisor’s associate by or under this Act is void.  2000, c. 3, s. 11.

Burden of proof
12 In any proceeding under this Act, the burden of proving an  exemption  or
an exclusion from a requirement or provision is on the person  claiming  it.
2000, c. 3, s. 12.

Exemption
13 (1)  Repealed:  2000, c. 3, s. 13 (7).

Same
(2)  If a franchisor meets the criteria prescribed for the purpose  of  this
subsection, the Lieutenant Governor in Council may,  by  regulation,  exempt
the  franchisor  from  the  requirement  to  include   specified   financial
information in a disclosure document, subject to the  terms  and  conditions
set out in the exempting regulation.  2000, c. 3, s. 13 (2).

General or specific
(3)  A regulation made under this section may be general or specific in  its
application.  2000, c. 3, s. 13 (3).

Revocation of exemption
(4)  A regulation made under this section may be revoked if  the  franchisor
no longer meets the prescribed criteria or if the franchisor asks  that  the
exemption be revoked.  2000, c. 3, s. 13 (4).

Statutory Powers Procedure Act does not apply
(5)  The Statutory Powers Procedure Act does not apply to a  decision  under
this section to grant or to refuse to grant an exemption,  to  impose  terms
and conditions on an exemption or  to  revoke  an  exemption.   2000,  c. 3,
s. 13 (5).
(6), (7)  Repealed:  2009, c. 33, Sched. 10, s. 1 (2).
Section Amendments with date in force (d/m/y)
2000, c. 3, s. 13 (7) - 01/07/2005
2009, c. 33, Sched. 10, s. 1 (2) - 15/12/2009

Regulations
14 (1)  The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations,
      (a)   defining co-operative association for the purpose  of  paragraph
    3 of subsection 2 (3);
      (a.1) prescribing an amount for the purpose of  subclause  5  (1)  (b)
    (i) or (5) (b) (i);
      (b)   prescribing types of changes that constitute a material change;
      (c)   prescribing material facts for the purpose of clause 5 (4) (a);
      (d)   prescribing the financial  statements  to  be  included  in  the
    disclosure document;
      (e)   prescribing statements for the purpose of clause 5 (4) (d);
      (f)   prescribing other information and  copies  of  documents  to  be
    included in the disclosure document;
      (f.1) prescribing the information to be included  in  a  statement  of
    material change for the purpose of subsection 5 (5.1);
      (g)   prescribing a percentage of sales for the purpose  of  clause  5
    (7) (e);
      (h)   prescribing a manner or an amount for the purpose  of  subclause
    5 (7) (g) (i) or clause 5 (7) (h);
      (i)   Repealed: 2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 4 (2).
      (j)   prescribing methods of delivery for the purposes of  subsections
    5 (2) and 6 (3), and prescribing rules  surrounding  the  use  of  such
    methods, including the day on which a notice of rescission delivered by
    such methods is effective for the purpose of clause 6 (4) (e);
      (k)   prescribing criteria for the purposes of subsections 13 (1)  and
    (2);
      (k.1) defining, for the purposes of this Act, any word  or  expression
    used in this Act that has not already been expressly  defined  in  this
    Act;
      (l)   respecting any matter that the Lieutenant  Governor  in  Council
    considers necessary or advisable to carry out  effectively  the  intent
    and purpose of this Act. 2000, c. 3, s. 14 (1); 2001,  c. 9,  Sched. D,
    s. 1; 2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 4.

General or specific
(2)  A regulation made under subsection (1) may be general  or  specific  in
its application. 2000, c. 3, s. 14 (2).
Section Amendments with date in force (d/m/y)
2001, c. 9, Sched. D, s. 1 - 29/06/2001
2017, c. 20, Sched. 9, s. 4 (1, 2) - 01/09/2020
15 Omitted (provides for coming into  force  of  provisions  of  this  Act).
2000, c. 3, s. 15.
16 Omitted (enacts short title of this Act).  2000, c. 3, s. 16.
                        ____________________________

Français

Back to top
