Landlord and Tenant Board - Steps to Justice

 

 
 
 
 
 
	 
		 
		 
		 
	 
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		 
	 
	 
		 
			 
			 
				 
				 
				 
				 
				 
				 
				 
				 
				 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		 
		 
			 
				 
			 
		 
		 
	 
 
 

 Print

 Tribunals and Courts
 Landlord and Tenant Board
 Social Benefits Tribunal
 Provincial offences court
 Criminal court
 Family court
 Courts and partner abuse
 Human Rights Tribunal
 Small Claims Court

 Tribunals and Courts
 Landlord and Tenant Board

 Try these tools

 Use our Guided Pathways to fill out forms for the LTB, and to fight an eviction if you owe rent.

 Newest questions

 Most visited questions

 All questions

 Eviction notices

 If my landlord gives me an eviction notice, do I have to move?

 Can I stop the eviction by paying what I owe?

 Eviction hearings

 I want to make changes to my tribunal hearing. What can I do?

 What are my options before my eviction hearing?

 What happens at an eviction hearing?

 See all (6)

 Eviction orders

 The LTB had a hearing and made an eviction order. What can I do?

 What if my landlord got an eviction order without a hearing?

 What happens if there is an eviction order and I do not move?

 See all (4)

 Settling your case

 What are my options before my eviction hearing?

 Can I stop the eviction by paying what I owe?

 I&#8217;m taking my landlord to the LTB. Can we settle without a hearing?

 Tenant applications

 What problems can I apply to the LTB about?

 I&#8217;m taking my landlord to the LTB. How do I present my case?

 I&#8217;m taking my landlord to the LTB. Can we settle without a hearing?

 See all (14)

 This site contains general legal information for Ontario, Canada. It is not intended to be used as legal advice for a specific legal problem.
 Copyright 2026 CLEO (Community Legal Education Ontario / Éducation juridique communautaire Ontario).

 Live chat

 To top