Filing a consumer complaint | ontario.ca

 Skip to main content

 Ontario.ca needs JavaScript to function properly and provide you with a fast, stable experience.

 To have a better experience, you need to:

 Go to your browser's settings
 Enable JavaScript

 Log in to continue

 Please log in for full account access.

 Filing a consumer complaint

 Find out how to file a complaint against a business in Ontario.

 Image

 On this page
 Skip this page navigation

 How you're protected
 Whether you're buying an appliance, signing up for a gym membership, shopping online, or renovating your home, your transaction is likely covered by a consumer protection law .
 The types of consumer complaints we can assist you with
 We encourage you to file a complaint with us if you think your consumer rights have been violated to help the government enforce these laws.
 Here are some of the types of consumer complaints the law covers:
 Auto repair
 Bailiffs
 Collection agencies
 Consumer reporting
 Home furnishings and furniture
 Home renovation and maintenance
 Large appliances, including heating and air conditioning equipment
 Payday loans
 The types of consumer complaints we may not be able to assist with
 We may not be able to help if your complaint:
 Is based on events that occurred more than two years ago
 Is about a business-to-business transaction
 Focuses on the quality of a good or service beyond the basic guarantees in consumer protection legislation
 Is seeking a form of damages or compensation other than a refund of monies already paid or the cancellation of an agreement as provided under consumer protection legislation
 If your complaint is not covered by the consumer protection laws we enforce, we will do our best to help you find an organization or government office that can assist you.
 Here is whom to contact for help if your complaint relates to:
 Condominiums
 Credit unions, insurance, pension plans, loans, or mortgage brokers
 Electrical safety/electrical contracts
 Federally regulated financial institutions
 Fraud and identity theft
 Home builders
 Motor vehicle dealerships
 Real estate transactions
 Telecom-television services
 Towing
 Travel
 How to file a complaint
 Here are the steps you should take to file a complaint with the ministry:
 Step 1: inform the business of your complaint
 We recommend writing to the business before you file a complaint with us.
 You should advise the business of your complaint by letter, email, or by telephone.
 Make sure your letter or email includes:
 the name of the business
 how your rights were violated
 if you have reached out to the Ministry of Public and Business Service Delivery and Procurement
 If you advise the business by phone, make sure to note the date and details of the conversation.
 In some cases, you may also include one of the province's consumer complaint notices to help get a response from certain businesses. There are complaint notices regarding:
 alleged violations of the Consumer Protection Act
 collection agencies
 debt settlement services
 payday lenders and loan brokers
 credit reporting agencies
 If the business does not resolve your complaint after receiving your letter, email, or phone call, you can file a complaint with us.
 Step 2: submit a complaint to us
 There is no cost involved.
 When submitting a complaint online, you will also be asked to provide supporting documents. These include:
 A copy of the letter you wrote to the business about your complaint and any response they have sent back to you
 Your contract or any other related agreements (if applicable)
 Copies of invoices, records of payments made and any other letters, documents and emails
 Logs of calls from a collection agency (if applicable), consumer reports or any documentation relating to the original debt relevant to your complaint
 Submit your complaint online
 Submit your complaint on paper or by email. If you require an alternate format, please contact us.
 To file your complaint on paper or by email, please use this PDF version of the complaint form.
 Send your completed form with copies of any supporting documents by mail or email to:
 Ministry of Public and Business Service Delivery and Procurement Consumer Services Operations Division PO Box 450 Toronto, ON M7A 2J6
 Courier packages should be delivered by Canada Post or Purolator.
 Email: consumer@ontario.ca
 Step 3: after you submit your complaint
 We will contact you by email, mail or phone within 15 business days.
 Complaints will be examined on a case-by-case basis to determine what action, if any, should be taken based on the facts and evidence available. Depending on the legislation and statute, the ministry's involvement may include:
 referring you to an organization or government office that is better suited to deal with the complaint
 attempting to mediate a resolution between you and the business
 educating the business about consumer protection laws and the consumer about their rights
 For businesses that have not complied with consumer protection legislation repeatedly, the ministry may:
 issue an administrative action against a business, if the business is licensed, registered, or appointed by the Ministry of Public and Business Service Delivery and Procurement
 issue a compliance or other type of order
 conducting an investigation into the conduct/activities of the business where appropriate
 monitor the business
 publish the business name on the Consumer Beware List if certain regulatory conditions are met
 Learn more about actions we take with respect to your complaints .
 Questions about filing a complaint
 If you have any questions about filing a complaint, call Consumer Protection Ontario between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday to Friday, at:
 1-800-889-9768 (toll free)
 416-326-8800 (Toronto area)
 TTY : 1-877-666-6545 (toll free)
 416-229-6086 (Toronto area)

 Updated: December 05, 2025

 Published: March 14, 2014

 Top