Consumer Protection Ontario | ontario.ca

 Skip to main content

 Ontario.ca needs JavaScript to function properly and provide you with a fast, stable experience.

 To have a better experience, you need to:

 Go to your browser's settings
 Enable JavaScript

 Log in to continue

 Please log in for full account access.

 Consumer Protection Ontario

 Before, during or after you make a purchase, learn your rights and find the information you need to know to protect yourself.

 On this page
 Skip this page navigation

 Consumer protection for individuals

 Consumer protection rights
 Learn about your consumer rights and the protection available to you under the Consumer Protection Act .

 Credit, loans and debt
 Payday loans, credit reports, and debt collection and settlement, including repossession of property.

 Families and relationships
 Dating services and getting married.

 Funerals and burial arrangements
 Planning a funeral, burial, cremation or scattering and what to do if you discover a burial site.

 Homes and renovations
 Door-to-door sales, buying or renting a home or condo, hiring a mover, and starting a renovation.

 Identity theft
 Protect yourself from identity theft, and learn what to do if you are a victim.

 Scams and fraud
 Learn about the common consumer scams, such as phishing scams and how to protect yourself if you are a victim.

 Shopping
 Shopping in-store and online, reward points, gift cards, returns, warranties, and exchanges.

 Take action
 File a complaint against a business or search the Consumer Beware List.

 Travel and entertainment
 Ticket sales, booking a trip, buying a timeshare and information on Ontario’s movie rating system.

 Vehicle ownership
 Buying a car, getting car repairs, or getting towed.

 Consumer protection for businesses

 Consumer and business relations
 Find business application, licence and permit forms
 Understand consumer rights and safety
 Learn more about different types of contracts and best practices
 Test Your Knowledge of the Consumer Protection Act
 Business Guide to Consumer Protection
 Free webinars for businesses

 Compliance and enforcement
 Get your business removed from the Consumer Beware List
 Prepare your business for an inspection
 See how the government handles consumer complaints

 Sector-specific information guides
 Door-to-door sellers
 Collection agencies
 Guide for businesses, bailiffs and assistant bailiffs
 Home renovation and roofing businesses
 Bereavement services
 Payday lenders
 Auto repair businesses
 Towing and vehicle storage service providers

 Updated: May 15, 2026

 Published: November 12, 2015

 Top