
Français
                         Fraudulent Conveyances Act

                          R.S.O. 1990, Chapter F.29

CONSOLIDATION PERIOD:  FROM DECEMBER 31, 1990 TO THE E-LAWS CURRENCY DATE.

No amendments.


Definitions
      1.  In this Act,
“conveyance”   includes   gift,   grant,   alienation,   bargain,    charge,
 encumbrance, limitation of use or uses of, in, to or out of real  property
 or personal property by writing or otherwise; (“cession”)
“personal property” includes goods, chattels, effects, bills,  bonds,  notes
 and securities, and shares, dividends, premiums and  bonuses  in  a  bank,
 company or corporation, and any interest therein; (“biens meubles”)
“real property” includes lands, tenements, hereditaments and any  estate  or
 interest therein. (“biens immeubles”)  R.S.O. 1990, c. F.29, s. 1.

Where conveyances void as against creditors
      2.  Every conveyance of real property or personal property  and  every
bond, suit, judgment and execution heretofore or hereafter made with  intent
to defeat, hinder, delay or defraud creditors or others of  their  just  and
lawful actions, suits, debts, accounts, damages,  penalties  or  forfeitures
are void as against such persons and their assigns.  R.S.O.  1990,  c. F.29,
s. 2.

Where s. 2 does not apply
      3.  Section 2 does  not  apply  to  an  estate  or  interest  in  real
property or personal property conveyed upon good consideration and  in  good
faith to a person not having at the time of the  conveyance  to  the  person
notice or knowledge of the intent set forth in that section.   R.S.O.  1990,
c. F.29, s. 3.

Where s. 2 applies
      4.  Section 2 applies to every conveyance  executed  with  the  intent
set forth in that section despite the fact  that  it  was  executed  upon  a
valuable consideration and with the intention, as  between  the  parties  to
it, of actually transferring to and for the benefit of  the  transferee  the
interest expressed to be thereby transferred, unless it is  protected  under
section 3 by reason of good faith and want of notice  or  knowledge  on  the
part of the purchaser.  R.S.O. 1990, c. F.29, s. 4.

When fraudulent conveyances declared void as against purchasers
      5.  Every conveyance of real property  heretofore  or  hereafter  made
with intent to defraud and deceive the purchaser shall be deemed to be  void
only as against that  person  and  the  person’s  assigns  and  all  persons
lawfully claiming under  that  person  or  the  person’s  assigns  who  have
purchased or hereafter purchase for money or other  good  consideration  the
same real property or a part thereof.  R.S.O. 1990, c. F.29, s. 5.

Where s. 5 does not apply
      6.  Section 5 does  not  apply  to  and  shall  not  be  construed  to
impeach, defeat or make void a conveyance of  real  property  made  in  good
faith and for good consideration.  R.S.O. 1990, c. F.29, s. 6.

Conveyances made revocable
      7.  (1)  If a person makes  a  conveyance  of  real  property  with  a
clause, provision, article, or condition  of  revocation,  determination  or
alteration at that person’s will or  pleasure,  and  after  such  conveyance
bargains, sells, demises, grants, conveys or charges such real  property  or
a part thereof to a person for money or other  good  consideration  paid  or
given, such first  conveyance  not  being  revoked,  made  void  or  altered
according to the power and authority so reserved or expressed therein,  then
such first conveyance as touching the  real  property  so  after  bargained,
sold, conveyed, demised or charged is void against the bargainees,  vendees,
lessees, grantees, their heirs, successors, and their  assigns  and  against
every person lawfully claiming under them.  R.S.O. 1990, c. F.29, s. 7 (1).

Saving as to mortgages
      (2)  No lawful mortgage made in  good  faith,  and  without  fraud  or
covin, and upon good consideration shall be impeached or impaired  by  force
of this Act, but it has the like force and effect as if  this  Act  had  not
been passed.  R.S.O. 1990, c. F.29, s. 7 (2).

Validity of voluntary conveyance, etc., executed in good faith and duly
registered
      8.  (1)  Nothing in section 5, 6 or 7 extends to a conveyance that  is
executed in good faith and duly  registered  in  the  proper  land  registry
office before the execution of the conveyance to, and  before  the  creation
of any binding contract for the conveyance to a  subsequent  purchaser  from
the same grantor of the same real property or a part thereof, nor is such  a
conveyance merely by reason of the absence of a valuable consideration  void
as against  such  purchaser  or  the  heirs,  executors,  administrators  or
assigns of the purchaser or any person claiming by, from  or  under  any  of
them.  R.S.O. 1990, c. F.29, s. 8 (1).

Effect of subs. (1)
      (2)  Nothing in subsection (1) has  the  effect  of  making  valid  an
instrument that is for any reason, other than or in addition to the  absence
of a valuable consideration, void under section 5, 6 or 7 or otherwise,  nor
has the effect of making valid an instrument as against a purchaser who  had
before the 28th day of February, 1868, entered into a binding  contract  for
or  received  a  conveyance  upon  such  purchase.   R.S.O.  1990,  c. F.29,
s. 8 (2).
                            ____________________

Français

Back to top
