
Français
                          Frustrated Contracts Act

                          R.S.O. 1990, Chapter F.34

CONSOLIDATION PERIOD: FROM DECEMBER 2, 1993 TO THE E-LAWS CURRENCY DATE.

Last amendment: 1993, c.27, Sched.

Legislative History: 1993, c. 27, Sched.

Definitions
1 In this Act,
“contract” includes a contract to which the Crown is a party; (“contrat”)
“court” means the court or arbitrator by or before whom a  matter  falls  to
 be determined; (“tribunal”)
“discharged” means  relieved  from  further  performance  of  the  contract.
 (“libéré”)  R.S.O. 1990, c. F.34, s. 1.

Application of Act
2 (1)  This Act applies to any contract that  is  governed  by  the  law  of
Ontario and that has become impossible  of  performance  or  been  otherwise
frustrated and to the parties which for that reason  have  been  discharged.
R.S.O. 1990, c. F.34, s. 2 (1); 1993, c. 27, Sched.

Exceptions
(2)  This Act does not apply,
      (a)   to a charterparty or a contract for the  carriage  of  goods  by
    sea, except a time charterparty or a charterparty by way of demise;
      (b)   to a contract of insurance; or
      (c)   to a contract for the sale of specific goods  where  the  goods,
    without the knowledge of the seller, have  perished  at  the  time  the
    contract was made, or where the goods, without any fault on the part of
    the seller or buyer, perished before the  risk  passed  to  the  buyer.
    R.S.O. 1990, c. F.34, s. 2 (2).
Section Amendments with date in force (d/m/y)
1993, c. 27, Sched. - 31/12/1991

Adjustment of rights and liabilities
3 (1)  The sums paid or payable to  a  party  in  pursuance  of  a  contract
before the parties were discharged,
      (a)   in the case of sums paid, are  recoverable  from  the  party  as
    money received for the use of the party by whom the sums were paid; and
      (b)   in the case of sums payable, cease to be payable.  R.S.O.  1990,
    c. F.34, s. 3 (1).

Expenses
(2)  If, before the parties were discharged, the  party  to  whom  the  sums
were paid or payable incurred expenses in connection  with  the  performance
of the contract, the court, if it considers it just to do so  having  regard
to all the circumstances, may allow the party to retain or  to  recover,  as
the case may be, the whole or any part of  the  sums  paid  or  payable  not
exceeding  the  amount  of  the  expenses,  and,  without  restricting   the
generality of the foregoing, the court, in  estimating  the  amount  of  the
expenses, may include such sum as appears to be  reasonable  in  respect  of
overhead  expenses  and  in  respect  of  any  work  or  services  performed
personally by the party  incurring  the  expenses.   R.S.O.  1990,  c. F.34,
s. 3 (2).

Benefits
(3)  If, before the parties were discharged, any of them has, by  reason  of
anything done by any other party in connection with the performance  of  the
contract, obtained a valuable benefit other than a  payment  of  money,  the
court, if  it  considers  it  just  to  do  so  having  regard  to  all  the
circumstances,  may  allow  the  other  party  to  recover  from  the  party
benefitted the whole or any part of the value of the benefit.  R.S.O.  1990,
c. F.34, s. 3 (3).

Assumed obligations
(4)  Where  a  party  has  assumed  an  obligation  under  the  contract  in
consideration of the conferring of a benefit  by  any  other  party  to  the
contract upon any other person, whether a party to the contract or not,  the
court, if  it  considers  it  just  to  do  so  having  regard  to  all  the
circumstances, may, for the purposes of subsection (3),  treat  any  benefit
so conferred as a  benefit  obtained  by  the  party  who  has  assumed  the
obligation.  R.S.O. 1990, c. F.34, s. 3 (4).

Insurance
(5)  In considering whether any sum ought to be recovered or retained  under
this section by a party to the contract,  the  court  shall  not  take  into
account any sum that, by reason of the  circumstances  giving  rise  to  the
frustration of the contract, has become payable  to  that  party  under  any
contract of insurance unless there was an obligation to  insure  imposed  by
an express term of the frustrated contract or by  or  under  any  enactment.
R.S.O. 1990, c. F.34, s. 3 (5).

Special contractual provisions
(6)  Where  the  contract  contains  a  provision   that   upon   the   true
construction of the contract is intended to have  effect  in  the  event  of
circumstances that operate, or but  for  the  provision  would  operate,  to
frustrate  the  contract,  or  is  intended  to  have  effect  whether  such
circumstances arise or not, the court shall give  effect  to  the  provision
and shall give effect to this section  only  to  such  extent,  if  any,  as
appears to the court to be consistent  with  the  provision.   R.S.O.  1990,
c. F.34, s. 3 (6).

Where contract severable
(7)  Where it appears to the court that  a  part  of  the  contract  can  be
severed properly from the remainder of the contract,  being  a  part  wholly
performed before the parties were discharged, or  so  performed  except  for
the payment in respect of that part of the contract of sums that are or  can
be ascertained under the contract, the court shall treat that  part  of  the
contract as if it were a separate contract that had not been frustrated  and
shall treat this  section  as  applicable  only  to  the  remainder  of  the
contract.  R.S.O. 1990, c. F.34, s. 3 (7).
                               ______________

Français

Back to top
