-->

 Law Enforcement Complaints Agency

 
 
 

 

 Skip to main content

 Skip to "About this site"

 Check your complaint status
-->

 Learn About the Complaint Process

 Make a Complaint

 Check Complaint Status

				 About LECA

 Law Enforcement Complaints Agency (LECA) is responsible for receiving, managing and overseeing public complaints about misconduct of the following:

 All municipal, regional, and provincial (OPP) police officers;
 Special Constables employed by the Niagara Parks Commission;
 Peace Officers in the Legislative Protective Service; and
 First Nations police officers if the police service opts into the Community Safety and Policing Act (CSPA).

 As an independent civilian oversight agency, LECA ensures all public complaints against the police are dealt with in a manner that is transparent, effective and fair.

				Learn about the French language services offered at LECA				 Read More

				OIPRD to LECA - Frequently Asked Questions				 Frequently Asked Questions

				As of April 01, 2024, under the CSPA, the OIPRD was renamed to Law Enforcement Complaints Agency				 Read More

				Ontario's police complaints agency				 Learn More

				Have a complaint about the police?				 Make a Complaint Online

	 Previous

	 Next

 		 News & Publications

 	 LECA’s Modernized Public Complaint Form

 	 Apr 7, 2026
 The Law Enforcement Complaints Agency (LECA) has launched a modernized public complaint form designed to create a better complainant experience, improve the quality of information submitted, and support more efficient processing of complaints Key Improvements: Benefits for Complainants: These improvements are supported by corresponding changes to the LECA Rules of Procedure, as reflected in the [ ]

 	 Read More

 	 LECA Investigating Allegations of Misconduct against Peel Regional Police Officers related to Project South

 	 Feb 26, 2026
 On February 5, 2026, Toronto Police Service (TPS) and York Regional Police (YRP) held a press conference during which senior leaders announced criminal charges arising from an ongoing criminal investigation involving seven TPS officers. On February 6, 2026, Peel Regional Police (PRP) indicated that three officers were administratively suspended, resulting from further investigation by YRP [ ]

 	 Read More

 	 LECA Assumes Control of the Conduct Investigation into the Toronto Police Service Officers Charged and Arrested

 	 Feb 9, 2026
 On February 5, 2026, Chief Demkiw participated in a joint press conference with senior York Regional Police officers, including Chief MacSween, in announcing serious criminal charges against seven Toronto Police Service (TPS) officers. The information provided at the press conference focused on the criminal investigation. Under Ontario’s police oversight framework, separate obligations also arise in [ ]

 	 Read More

 See All News

 LECA Youtube Channel
 Check out our video on how to fill out a complaint form.
 Visit our YouTube channel

 Systemic Reviews
 LECA continues to have the power to conduct systemic reviews. The purpose of a systemic review is to determine whether systemic failings have occurred and identify issues to be addressed in order to make recommendations for change, rather than assign individual fault. A systemic review will sometimes be done at the same time as a conduct investigation, although they involve separate procedures. In accordance with the CSPA, before commencing a review, the Complaints Director will notify the Inspector General.
 Following a review, the Complaints Director may:
(a)make written recommendations to the Inspector General, the Minister, a chief of police, a police service board or any other person or body; and
(b) require in writing that a person or body to whom recommendations are made provide a written response, which must include a statement as to whether the recommendations have been accepted and, if not, the reasons why.
 Archive of the OIPRD&#8217;s systemic reviews can be found here .

			 About Us
 Complaints
 Resolutions
 Media
 Contact

			 Follow us on
			 Youtube
			 Twitter

			 Privacy
			 | Terms of Use
			 |
			 Accessibility 			 |
			 © King’s Printer for Ontario, 2026