Landlord and Tenant Board - Tribunals Ontario

	 

 
		 
		 Skip to main
			content 
		 
 
	 
			 Menu
 

 
 -->
 		 
			 

		 
	 
		 Important Notice
 September 21, 2026
 Effective September 21, 2026, the Landlord and Tenant Board ( LTB ) is updating some of its processes, forms, and rules as a result of amendments to the Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 introduced through the Fighting Delays, Building Faster Act (Bill 60) and the Helping Homebuyers, Protecting Tenants Act , 2023 (Bill 97) . For more information, see our Operational Update .
 These changes are in addition to those introduced on July 1, 2026.
 July 24, 2026
 The Landlord and Tenant Board ( LTB ) is making it easier for people to access its final orders. For more information, see our Operational Update .

 
	 
		 Landlord and Tenant Board
 

 
	 
		 Resolve a dispute with a landlord or tenant, and/or end a tenancy or co-op member’s occupancy
 Learn about the Landlord and Tenant Board ( LTB ) application and hearing processes, your rights and responsibilities under the Residential Tenancies Act , and the rules and processes for non-profit co-op evictions at the LTB .

 
 		 
 			 Use Tribunals Ontario Portal to submit applications, check file status, upload evidence and use the dispute resolution tool to try and reach an agreement.
 Go to the Tribunals Ontario Portal

 
 			 Use Navigate Tribunals Ontario to learn about your rights and responsibilities and the rules and processes at the LTB .
 Go to Navigate Tribunals Ontario

 
 
	 
		 Before you file
 
				 Learn more about renting in Ontario
 Important steps to take before you file
 If you are not sure which application to file, use Navigate Tribunals Ontario to learn about your rights and responsibilities and the rules and processes at the LTB
 
		 Choosing and filing an application
 
				 Find all LTB forms , learn how to file and find all LTB fees
 Save time and money by filing L1, L2, L3, L4, L9, L10, T1, T2, T5, T6, C1, C2 and combined applications online using the Tribunals Ontario Portal
 For most other LTB applications, you can file your application by email
 
		 Application and hearing process
 
				 Learn about mediations and hearings at the LTB
 Find information about preparing for your hearing
 Find out what you can do after the LTB makes a decision
 Learn more about the LTB service timelines , including application and processing times.
 
 Non-Profit Co-op evictions
 
 		 Learn about how a non-profit housing co-operative (co-op) can apply to the LTB and what to do before you file.
 Learn how to respond to a co-op application if you are a co-op Member
 Learn about the hearing process , and what you can do after the LTB makes a decision
 Find all forms and fees
 Find contact information for the LTB ’s non-profit co-op unit
 
		 Laws, rules and decisions
 
				 Learn more about the Residential Tenancies Act
 Learn about the laws, rules and decisions affecting the LTB
 
		 Resources
 
				 For more information about the LTB and its processes, refer to LTB &#8216;s brochures
 
		 Contact the LTB
 
 		 Learn how to contact the LTB by email, phone, or mail
 

 
 		 
			 Learn about the supports and services offered by Tribunals Ontario , such as requesting an accommodation (including access to a computer, internet or phone), video and phone proceeding resources , options for legal help , French language services , Indigenous services , accessibility and diversity and more.
 Access our supports and services

 
		 
			 What&#8217;s new
 LTB: Operational Update Legislative Changes at the Landlord and Tenant Board, Effective: September 21, 2026 September 21, 2026
 LTB: Operational Update Increasing Public Access to Final LTB Orders July 24, 2026

			 

 

 

	 
	 
		 Go to Top