
Français
                               Negligence Act

                          R.S.O. 1990, Chapter N.1

CONSOLIDATION PERIOD:  FROM JANUARY 1, 2004 TO THE E-LAWS CURRENCY DATE.

Last amendment:  2002, c.24, Sched.B, s.25.


Extent of liability, remedy over
      1.  Where damages have been caused or contributed to by the  fault  or
neglect of two or more persons, the court  shall  determine  the  degree  in
which each of such persons is at fault or negligent, and, where two or  more
persons are found at fault or negligent,  they  are  jointly  and  severally
liable to the person suffering loss or damage for such fault or  negligence,
but as between themselves,  in  the  absence  of  any  contract  express  or
implied, each is liable to make contribution and  indemnify  each  other  in
the degree  in  which  they  are  respectively  found  to  be  at  fault  or
negligent.  R.S.O. 1990, c. N.1, s. 1.

Recovery as between tortfeasors
      2.  A tortfeasor may recover contribution or indemnity from any  other
tortfeasor who is, or would if sued have been,  liable  in  respect  of  the
damage to any person suffering damage as a result  of  a  tort  by  settling
with  the  person  suffering  such  damage,  and  thereafter  commencing  or
continuing  action  against  such  other  tortfeasor,  in  which  event  the
tortfeasor settling the damage shall satisfy the court that  the  amount  of
the settlement was reasonable, and in the event that  the  court  finds  the
amount of the settlement was excessive it may fix the amount  at  which  the
claim should have been settled.  R.S.O. 1990, c. N.1, s. 2.

Plaintiff guilty of contributory negligence
      3.  In any action for damages  that  is  founded  upon  the  fault  or
negligence of the defendant if fault or negligence is found on the  part  of
the plaintiff that contributed to the damages,  the  court  shall  apportion
the damages in proportion  to  the  degree  of  fault  or  negligence  found
against the parties respectively.  R.S.O. 1990, c. N.1, s. 3.

Where parties to be deemed equally at fault
      4.  If it is not practicable to determine  the  respective  degree  of
fault or negligence as between any parties to an action, such parties  shall
be deemed to be equally at fault or negligent.  R.S.O. 1990, c. N.1, s. 4.

Adding parties
      5.  Wherever it appears that a  person  not  already  a  party  to  an
action is or may be wholly or partly responsible for  the  damages  claimed,
such person may be added as a party defendant to the action upon such  terms
as are considered just or may be made a third party to  the  action  in  the
manner prescribed by the rules of court for adding  third  parties.   R.S.O.
1990, c. N.1, s. 5.

Jury to determine degrees of negligence of parties
      6.  In  any  action  tried  with  a  jury,  the  degree  of  fault  or
negligence of the respective parties is a question of  fact  for  the  jury.
R.S.O. 1990, c. N.1, s. 6.

When plaintiff may be liable for costs
      7.  Where the damages are occasioned by the  fault  or  negligence  of
more than one party, the court has power to direct that the plaintiff  shall
bear some portion of the  costs  if  the  circumstances  render  this  just.
R.S.O. 1990, c. N.1, s. 7.
      8.  Repealed:  2002, c. 24, Sched. B, s. 25.
                               ______________

Français

Back to top
