Public Access to Court Recordings and Records - Ontario Court of Justice 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 

	 
	 
	 



 

			 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 -->
 
 
 -->
 
 
 -->
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
	 
	 
	 



		 
		 Skip to main content 
		 

		 
		 
		 

		 
		 
		 

		 
		 
		 


		 
		 



		 

						 Public Access to Court Recordings and Records

						Quick jump to...

						 Back to Public Access Overview

 Policy regarding access to digital audio recordings
 How to access court records

						 Policy regarding access to digital audio recordings

					 Digital Audio Recordings are recordings of “on the record” court proceedings at the Ontario Court of Justice. Below is a policy developed by the Ontario Court of Justice that explains how to obtain a recording and the restrictions to access the recordings.
 1. Application
 This Policy applies to all proceedings in the Ontario Court of Justice.  This Policy is subject to any order by the presiding judicial officer.
 2. Access to Digital Audio Recordings
 a) Copies of digital audio recordings will be provided, with a court order and upon completion of the appropriate court request form and undertaking ( Word , PDF ) and payment of any regulated copy fee, to the following:

						 Self-represented parties
 Media not on the Joint Courts’ List of Designated Media for Access to Digital Court Recordings posted on the Ontario Courts’ website at  www.ontariocourts.ca/en/media-list.htm .
 Authorized agents representing parties who are not licensed by the Law Society of Ontario
 Members of the public

					 The court order must be sought from the presiding judicial officer or, in their absence, the Regional Senior Judge/Regional Senior Justice of the or the local administrative Judge/local administrative Justice of the Peace, or their designate.
 b) Copies of digital audio recordings will be provided, upon completion of the appropriate court request form and undertaking ( Word , PDF ) and payment of any regulated copy fee, to the following: 

						 Legal counsel or paralegals licensed by the Law Society of Ontario, other than in proceedings governed by the  Youth Criminal Justice Act  and only for those proceedings in which they are acting for one of the parties
 Legal counsel of record authorized to have access to records in proceedings governed by the  Youth Criminal Justice Act
 Municipal, provincial and federal prosecutors for those proceedings in which they are acting for one of the parties
 Media on the Joint Courts’ List of Designated Media for Access to Digital Court Recordings posted on the Ontario Courts’ website at  www.ontariocourts.ca/en/media-list.htm
 Administration of justice officers or agencies authorized by Memorandum of Understanding or legislation to have access to transcripts or digital audio recordings of court proceedings. Such access is restricted to those court proceedings that relate directly to the matter under consideration by these agencies.

					 Persons attending on behalf of any of the above may obtain the digital audio recording upon providing the appropriate court request form, signed undertaking, applicable fee, and signed authorization court form.
 c) Copies of digital audio court recordings will be provided, upon request and at no charge, to the following:

						 Court Services Division staff who require access in the course of their employment responsibilities
 Transcriptionists who are authorized under the Evidence Act who require access to transcribe court proceedings and who have signed an “Undertaking of Authorized Court Transcriptionist for Access to Audio Court Recordings”
 Authorized representatives of the Ontario Judicial Council and the Justices of the Peace Review Council for the purpose of investigating a complaint against a judge, justice of the peace or other judicial officer
 The presiding judicial officer
 A judge presiding at an appeal under the Provincial Offences Act
 The trial justice of the peace, for the purpose of reviewing the decision on the appeal of their own matter
 The regional senior judge/regional senior justice of the peace, who will advise the presiding judicial officer that access or copies of the digital audio recording were made available to them. The regional senior judge/regional senior justice of the peace will consult with an Associate Chief Justice prior to requesting access to the digital audio recording.

					 3. Restrictions on Access to Digital Audio Recordings
 a) Unless a judicial officer orders otherwise, there is no access to digital audio recordings of the following:

						 In camera  proceedings or any portion of a proceeding that is heard  in camera

						 Proceedings that are private or closed pursuant to common law, statute or court order
 Proceedings subject to a statutory, common law or court ordered restriction on the provision of court records, transcripts or recordings of the proceedings
 Proceedings under the Youth Criminal Justice Act
 Case, settlement and trial management conferences .

					 b) Sealing order:

						 Where any digital audio recording is of a proceeding where there is a sealing order, no access shall be provided to any person other than the presiding judicial officer, the Ontario Judicial Council or the Justices of the Peace Review Council, without a court order of the judicial officer making the sealing order or an appellate reviewing court.

					 4. Publication Bans and Other Restrictions
 Anyone receiving a digital audio recording pursuant to this Policy is responsible to identify and comply with any publication bans, sealing orders, or other restrictions imposed by statute or by court order.
 Request Form/Undertaking to the Court for Access to Digital Court Recordings:   Word ,  PDF . 
 Request Form/Undertaking of Counsel/Licensed Paralegal of Record to the Court for Access to Digital Court Recordings: Word , PDF

							 How to access court records

							 Court files, documents and exhibits

						 Court records are managed by the Ministry of the Attorney General or by municipal Provincial Offences Act (POA) courts. The Ministry has a policy regarding access to court records that you may find here: Ministry of Attorney General Policy to Access Court Records . It explains which court documents are available to the media and how to access them. This policy applies to all court records, including those managed by municipal POA courts.
 Child Protection, Adoption and Openness court records are not available to the public, including the media. Similarly, Youth Criminal Justice and other additional criminal court records may not be available to the public or media as specified in the Ministry of the Attorney General’s Policy to Access Court Records.
 Requests for access to court records should be made at the court location where the matter was heard.

							 Useful resources:

								 Ministry of Attorney General Policy to Access Court Records

								 Provincial Offences Court locations

								 Courthouse addresses

 
 
	 

		 

			 
				 
					 
						 Ontario Court of Justice 

 

 

		 

			 
			 
				 
					 
						 This website is maintained by the Office of the Chief Justice.

 

 

			 
			 
				 
					 Accessibility
 Ontario Courts
 Website Policies
 Sitemap

 

 

 
 
	 
		 

			 
				

				 
				 
					 
						 
							 RSS
						 

 


 

 

 
	 

 

	 -->