Find mental health support | ontario.ca

 Skip to main content

 Ontario.ca needs JavaScript to function properly and provide you with a fast, stable experience.

 To have a better experience, you need to:

 Go to your browser's settings
 Enable JavaScript

 Log in to continue

 Please log in for full account access.

 Find mental health support

 Mental health is just as important as physical health. Learn about supports available to you, and how to get help when you need it.

 On this page
 Skip this page navigation

 Emergency

 If this is an emergency, or you or someone you know is in immediate danger, please call 911 or go to your nearest hospital or emergency department.

 Get help. Talk to someone.
 ConnexOntario Helpline
 Free and confidential health services information for people experiencing problems with alcohol and drugs, mental illness or gambling.
 Toll-free: 1-866-531-2600
 Live web chat
 Email
 BounceBack ®
 A free cognitive behavioural therapy ( CBT ) program that offers guided mental health self-help supports for adults and youth 15 and older .
 Toll-free: 1-866-345-0224
 Mental health and addiction services
 Get free, confidential support for depression, anxiety, addiction or problem gambling.
 Healing after violence
 Get help for victims of crime, and survivors of sexual abuse, sexual assault or partner violence.

 211 Ontario
 Information and referral for community, government, social and health services, including mental health resources across Ontario.
 Call 2-1-1
 Toll-free: 1-877-330-3213
 Live web chat
 Email
 Distress and crisis services
 Find distress and crisis support in your region.
 Newcomers to Ontario
 Learn about dealing with stress, understanding mental illness and asking for help (available in multiple languages).

 Children and youth
 One Stop Talk
 Free, confidential, immediate mental health support with a registered therapist for children and youth under 18 years of age.
 Toll-free: 1-855-416-TALK (8255)
 onestoptalk.ca
 Kids Help Phone
 Canada’s only 24/7 free e-mental health service offering multilingual and confidential support for all young people.
 Toll-free: 1-800-668-6868 (service available in over 100 languages, with the help of trained interpreters)
 Message online at KidsHelpPhone.ca
 Text CONNECT to 686868
 Good2Talk
 A 24/7 free, confidential and multilingual support service for post-secondary students in Ontario. Students can also access moderated peer message boards.
 Toll-free: 1-866-925-5454
 Message online at Good2Talk.ca
 Text CONNECT to 686868

 Youth Wellness Hubs
 25 hubs provide high-quality integrated youth services to support the well-being of young people aged 12 to 25, including mental health and substance use supports, primary health care, community and social supports, and more.
 Signs and symptoms
 Identify when a child or youth may need mental health support.
 Mental health services
 Find mental health support for children and youth under the age of 18.
 Mental health resources in schools
 Access services at or through schools.

 Indigenous communities
 Hope for Wellness Helpline
 Immediate mental health counselling and crisis intervention for all Indigenous peoples across Canada (available in some Indigenous languages).
 Toll-free: 1-855-242-3310
 Live web chat
 Aboriginal Health Access Centres
 Access primary health care, traditional healing and other services.
 Shkaabe Makwa
 Access programs and counselling for Indigenous people experiencing substance use and mental health issues.

 Talk 4 Healing
 Indigenous women can get help, support and resources seven days a week, 24 hours a day, with services in 14 languages.
 Toll-free: 1-855-554-4325
 Text: 1-855-554-4325
 Indigenous children and youth
 Find a variety of mental health and wellness supports, including traditional healing and culture-based services.

 Resources at work
 Workplace mental health
 Reduce stress and promote mental health at work.
 Mental wellness supports for health care workers
 If you are a health care worker who is in need of mental wellness resources, you can quickly access supports, including:
 resources you can access on your own to help you manage your mental wellness and maintain your well-being
 professional peer group supports
 confidential support, by phone or online, working with a mental health professional
 Find individual support through any of the following organizations:
 The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH)
 St. Joseph’s Healthcare Hamilton
 Ontario Shores Centre for Mental Health Sciences
 Waypoint Centre for Mental Health Care
 The Royal Mental Health – Care and Research
 Find organization level resources and training:
 Canadian Mental Health Association – Ontario Division

 Mental health resources for first responders and public safety personnel
 Explore mental health resources for serving and retired first responders and public safety personnel, and their families.
 Farmers
 Find resources to help reduce stress and improve well-being for farmers and their families.

 Updated: August 07, 2026

 Published: January 29, 2019

 Top