Have your court fees waived | ontario.ca

 Skip to main content

 Ontario.ca needs JavaScript to function properly and provide you with a fast, stable experience.

 To have a better experience, you need to:

 Go to your browser's settings
 Enable JavaScript

 Log in to continue

 Please log in for full account access.

 Have your court fees waived

 Find out if you qualify to have your court fees waived and learn how to apply.

 On this page
 Skip this page navigation

 Overview
 You might need to pay fees if you go to court in Ontario. If you cannot afford to pay the fees, you can ask the court to waive them. If you request a fee waiver, the court will consider your financial situation and decide whether you meet the requirements to qualify.
 If you meet the requirements and the court agrees to waive the fees, you will get a certificate called a fee waiver. Show this certificate to court staff if they ask you to pay a fee.
 If you do not meet the requirements, but cannot afford to pay court fees, you can ask the court to have your situation evaluated by a judge.
 Each request is reviewed based on the form and documents you submit. The decision of staff or a judge is final. If your financial situation changes, you can request a fee waiver again. There is no cost to apply for a fee waiver.
 You need to apply for a separate fee waiver for each case or proceeding you are involved in. A fee waiver will not apply to any fees you have already paid.
 Who can ask for a fee waiver
 You can ask for a fee waiver if:
 you are or will be involved in a family, civil or small claims court matter
 you are not acting on behalf of a business or organization
 your fees are not being paid by a lawyer under a contingency fee agreement (an arrangement when the lawyer gets paid at the end of the case, depending on the outcome)
 The court may approve your request for a fee waiver if one or more of these things are true :
 your main source of household income is from: income assistance from Ontario Works
 income support from the Ontario Disability Support Program
 the Old Age Security Pension and the Guaranteed Income Supplement
 the War Veterans Allowance
 Canada Pension Plan benefits

 your lawyer is being paid by a Legal Aid Certificate
 you meet the following financial eligibility requirements: the total amount of money everyone in your household earns in a year (before taxes or deductions), called gross annual household income, is below: $33,100 for one person
 $49,600 for two people
 $57,300 for three people
 $68,700 for four people
 $80,200 for five or more people

 your household liquid assets are less than $2,800. This includes assets owned by the members of your household that are money or can be converted into money (such as stocks, bonds, RRSPs or GICs that are not locked in)
 your household net worth is less than $11,100. Household net worth is the value of all assets owned by the members of your household, minus their debts and other financial liabilities

 If you don’t meet the fee waiver requirements, but you don’t believe you can afford to pay court fees, you can make a request directly to the court to have your financial situation evaluated by a judge.
 Fees that cannot be waived
 There are some fees that cannot be waived, such as:
 fees you pay to someone who is not part of the court (this includes lawyers, authorized court transcriptionists, official examiners, witnesses and mediators)
 fees relating to criminal matters
 disbursements paid to the sheriff or small claims court bailiff to enforce an order (unless the order was made under subsection 31(3) of the Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 )
 the federal Central Registry of Divorce Proceedings fee
 fees for serving documents on another party
 fees prescribed for bankruptcy proceedings under the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act
 A fee waiver does not apply to any costs a court has ordered you to pay to another party.
 How to apply
 Step 1: Get the correct form
 Choose the form you need depending on your circumstances. Choose the form you need and download it below or get one at your local courthouse in person.
 If you think you meet the financial requirements , fill out the Fee Waiver Request to Registrar, Clerk or Sheriff (form FW-A-3) .
 If you do not think you meet the financial requirements , fill out the Fee Waiver Request to Court (form FW-A 4) .
 If you are a litigation guardian or special party representative acting for a ‘person under disability' and the person meets the financial requirements, fill out the Fee Waiver Request to Registrar, Clerk or Sheriff by a Litigation Guardian for a Person Under Disability or a Person Representing a Special Party (form FW-A 6) .
 If you are a litigation guardian or special party representative acting for a ‘person under disability’ and the person does not meet the financial requirements, fill out the Fee Waiver Request to Court by a Litigation Guardian for a Person Under Disability or a Person Representing a Special Party (form FW-A 7).
 Step 2: Fill out the form
 Fill out the form and gather any required documents. Make sure that all the personal information you provide is complete and current. If your contact information changes, it is your responsibility to update the court in writing.
 If you already have a court file, include your file/claim number and the title of the proceeding or name of the case on the form.
 You will have to provide proof of your gross annual household income. This includes proof of income for your spouse, if you have one.
 If you are filling out a Fee Waiver Request to Registrar, Clerk or Sheriff (form FW-A-3) or a Fee Waiver Request to Registrar, Clerk or Sheriff by a Litigation Guardian for a Person Under Disability or a Person Representing a Special Party (form FW-A 6) , you can submit any one of these three documents for each of you and your spouse: your tax return or notice of assessment for the most recent taxation year
 your most recent statement of earnings from your employer showing the total earnings paid in the year to date including overtime or your three most recent pay stubs
 the most recent statement of income showing income from employment insurance, social assistance, a pension, workers compensation or disability payments

 If you cannot provide any of these documents, explain why and continue to fill out the rest of the form, where you will write down your household’s income information instead.
 You do not need to provide proof of income or complete the table setting out your household income if your lawyer is being paid by a Legal Aid Certificate.
 If you are filling out a Fee Waiver Request to Court (form FW-A 4) or a Fee Waiver Request to Court by a Litigation Guardian for a Person Under Disability or a Person Representing a Special Party (FW-A 7) because you do not meet the requirements, you must: fill out Exhibit B and list your household members along with their income, expenses, and assets. Also, attach a recent financial document for each item. This can include a tax return, pay stubs, T-4 slips, benefit statements, or receipts.
 share any additional details about your financial situation with the court. Include anything not mentioned in question 5 of Exhibit A
 With Exhibit C , provide one of the following: the first document you file in your case that shows your position. This could be a statement of claim, an application, or a statement of defense.
 a copy of the order you wish to enforce or continue enforcing

 Guided Pathways to Family Court Forms
 If you need help completing a court fee waiver, you can use the Guided Pathway for requesting a court fee waiver , a free online tool developed by Community Legal Education Ontario ( CLEO ) and the Ministry of the Attorney General. The pathway asks you questions and inserts your answers into the required court form. When you’re finished, you can print your completed form and submit it to the court.
 Court staff will review your request first. If they determine that you do not meet the requirements, your request will be presented to a judge for review.
 Step 3: Swear or affirm your form
 Once you complete your fee waiver request form, you must swear or affirm that the information you provided is accurate and true to the best of your knowledge.
 You can get your form sworn or affirmed for free at the court or enforcement office.
 You can also have your form sworn or affirmed by a lawyer, paralegal, notary public or someone else who is authorized to commission documents called a Commissioner for Taking Affidavits. They may charge a fee for their service.
 While your lawyer can commission your affidavit, you still have to be the one to swear or affirm that the information provided is true. Your lawyer cannot do this on your behalf. It is a criminal offence to knowingly swear or affirm a false affidavit.
 Step 4: Submit your request
 You can submit your request either:
 online
 by mail
 in person
 You can submit the form on its own or along with any court document that you wish to file. Your lawyer or representative can also submit the form for you.
 Submit online
 Starting October 14, 2025, there are different online portals to file court documents depending on the region you are filing in.
 To file documents in the Toronto region, you must use the Ontario Courts Public Portal
 To file documents outside of the Toronto region, you must use the Justice Services Online portal
 Unless provided otherwise by the Court of Appeal, you must use the Ontario Court of Appeal Public Portal to file documents.
 Learn more about filing court documents online:
 File bankruptcy court documents online
 File civil or Divisional Court documents online
 File family court documents online
 File Small Claims Court documents online
 Important: If you have a fee waiver or want to apply for a fee waiver, you must use the online portals listed above when submitting your documents. For any document requiring a fee, choose the appropriate fee waiver option.
 If you submit an incorrect document, which is then accepted for filing and/or issuance, you will not receive a refund.
 Submit by mail
 Send the form and supporting documents by mail to the court or enforcement office where you will be paying a fee related to your court case or enforcement of order.
 You will get a response in the mail.
 Submit in person
 Bring the form and supporting documents to the court or enforcement office where you would pay a fee related to your court case or enforcement of order.
 You will find out immediately if you qualify for the fee waiver.
 When a fee waiver certificate may be revoked
 Your fee waiver certificate can be revoked (cancelled or invalidated) by a judge if they think that your actions in your case or proceeding are frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of the court’s process.
 A judge can also make an order requiring you to get permission from the court before asking for another fee waiver. You will have a chance to submit a statement or argument to a judge before they revoke your fee waiver.
 Court interpretation service fees
 A court interpreter can help you understand what is being said in court if you do not speak English or French. You have the right to use a court interpreter if you or a witness are deaf or do not understand the language of the proceeding.
 If you have a fee waiver, you can request the help of a court interpreter for free for any language other than English or French. You can ask for a court interpreter for yourself or for your witness.
 You do not need a fee waiver if you or your witness require an English-French or French-English language interpreter for a civil, family and small claims court matter.
 To ask for a court interpreter when you have a fee waiver:
 Fill out the Request For Court Interpreter by an Individual who has been Given Fee Waiver (FW-A 5) form.
 Submit the form online, in person or by mail to the court office where you filed your fee waiver. Submit the form as soon as you find out the date and time of the court appearance when the interpreter will be required.
 If you do not qualify for a fee waiver for your civil, family, or small claims court proceeding, you are responsible for booking and paying for interpreter services for yourself or for your witness. You will not be refunded for the cost of these privately arranged interpreter services.

 Updated: April 09, 2026

 Published: July 27, 2021

 Top