Small claims court fees | ontario.ca

 Skip to main content

 Ontario.ca needs JavaScript to function properly and provide you with a fast, stable experience.

 To have a better experience, you need to:

 Go to your browser's settings
 Enable JavaScript

 Log in to continue

 Please log in for full account access.

 Small claims court fees

 Learn about fees for suing in Small Claims Court.

 Changing how you access the courts in Toronto

 The Justice Services Online platform will no longer accept electronic submissions for Toronto matters due to the transition to the new Ontario Courts Public Portal ( OCPP ). For urgent or time-sensitive filings, please file in-person at the court counter or contact the appropriate court location by email. Counter services will remain open for in-person filings, with extended hours of operations from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.

-->

 On this page
 Skip this page navigation

 Overview
 You must pay a fee for most steps in a Small Claims Court proceeding, including:
 filing a claim
 filing a motion
 requesting a trial date
 taking steps to enforce a judgment
 Court fees are set out in regulations made under the Administration of Justice Act . To be sure that you have the current fee schedules, always refer to the regulations on the Ontario government’s e-Laws website .
 Fees are payable in Canadian funds, and may be paid by:
 cash (at the court or enforcement office counter)
 cheque or money order, payable to the Minister of Finance (either at the court, enforcement office counter or by mail)
 debit or credit card (in certain locations, and when filing Small Claims Court documents online )
 Find court address and contact information.
 If you cannot afford to pay the fees
 If you cannot afford to pay court or enforcement fees in your proceeding, you may request a fee waiver. If you are granted a fee waiver, it will apply to most fees in your court proceeding from that point forward. Find out how to apply for a fee waiver .
 Frequent claimant fees
 You are a frequent claimant if you have already filed 10 or more claims in this calendar year at the same Small Claims Court location. Frequent claimants pay higher fees to file a claim, to file a request for default judgment and to fix a date for a trial or an assessment hearing in the same year. Learn more about fees as a frequent claimant.
 Small Claims Court fees and allowances
 Note: In this section:
 “claim” does not include a defendant’s claim
 “claimant” includes an individual, a sole proprietorship, a partnership, an unincorporated organization and a corporation
 “frequent claimant” means a claimant who files a claim in a Small Claims Court office on or after January 1 in any calendar year and who has already filed 10 or more claims in the same office in that calendar year
 “infrequent claimant” means a claimant who is not a frequent claimant
 Fees payable to the clerk
 The court clerk is a person at the court office with many responsibilities including issuing documents, maintaining court files, and setting court dates.
 The following fees are payable to clerks of the Small Claims Court:
 Step in a Proceeding	 Fee
 Filing of a claim by an infrequent claimant	 $108
 Filing of a claim by a frequent claimant	 $228
 Filing of a defendant’s claim	 $108
 Filing of a notice of motion served on another party, a notice of motion without notice or a notice of motion for a consent order (except a notice of motion under the Wages Act )	 $127
 Filing of a defence	 $77
 Fixing of a date for a trial or an assessment hearing by an infrequent claimant	 $308
 Fixing of a date for a trial or an assessment hearing by a frequent claimant	 $403
 Filing of a request for default judgment by an infrequent claimant	 $94
 Filing of a request for default judgment by a frequent claimant	 $128
 Issuing a summons to a witness	 $33
 Receiving for enforcement a process from the Ontario Court of Justice or an order or judgment as provided by statute	 $45
 Issuing a certificate of judgment	 $30
 Issuing a writ of delivery, a writ of seizure and sale or a notice of examination	 $68
 Issuing or renewing a notice of garnishment	 $144
 Preparing and filing a consolidation order	 $127
 Forwarding a court file to Divisional Court for appeal	 $105
 Making up and forwarding of papers, documents and exhibits	 $105 and the transportation costs.
 Transmitting a document other than by mail	 The cost of transmission
 Making copies of documents, not requiring certification 	 $1 per page
 Making copies of documents, requiring certification 	 $4 per page
 For the inspection of a court file by, a person who has entered into an agreement with the Ministry of the Attorney General for the bulk inspection of court files 	 $1 per file
 For the inspection of a court file by, any other person, other than a solicitor or party in the proceeding 	 $11 per file
 Retrieving a court file from storage	 $83
 For a copy on compact disc (CD) of a digital recording of a court hearing in respect of a case, if such a recording exists and a copy is available, for a single day’s recording 	 $23
 For a copy on compact disc (CD) of a digital recording of a court hearing in respect of a case, if such a recording exists and a copy is available, for each additional day’s recording, if the request is made at the same time as the single day’s recording 	 $11
 The following fees are payable to clerks of the Small Claims Court, in addition to the above fees, in an application under the Repair and Storage Liens Act :
 Step in a Proceeding	 Fee
 Filing of an application	 $202
 Filing of a notice of objection	 $112
 Issuing an initial certificate or a final certificate	 $99
 Issuing a writ of seizure	 $68
 Fees and allowances payable to the bailiff
 The Rules of the Small Claim Court provide that the bailiff is responsible for enforcing orders of the Small Claims Court. The duties of bailiffs are carried out by the enforcement office.
 The following fees and allowances are payable to bailiffs of the Small Claims Court:
 Step in a Proceeding	 Fee
 For each attempt, whether or not successful, to enforce a writ of delivery	 $38
 For each attempt, whether or not successful, to enforce a writ of seizure and sale of personal property, where no sale is necessary 	 $38
 For each attempt, whether or not successful, to enforce a writ of seizure and sale of personal property, where a sale is necessary 	 $64
 For each attempt, whether or not successful, to enforce a writ of seizure under the Repair and Storage Leins Act 	 $38
 For enforcing a writ of delivery or a writ of seizure and sale of personal property, removing property seized, advertising the sale of personal property, including obtaining assistance in seizing, securing or retaining property	 Reasonable disbursements that are necessarily incurred, including appraisers’ fees.
 Fees and allowances payable to witnesses
 Witnesses are the people who provide evidence to the court if you go to trial. If you summons a witness to attend your trial, you must pay attendance money to the witness at the time you personally serve them. Attendance money includes a fee for the witness to attend court each day and travel expenses to get to court. Learn more about getting ready for court and about serving documents .
 The following fees and allowances are payable to witnesses appearing before the Small Claims Court:
 Step in a Proceeding	 Fee
 For attendance in court, unless the item below applies	 $11 per day
 For attendance in court by a barrister, solicitor, physician, surgeon, engineer, veterinary surgeon or other professional who is not a party to the action, to give evidence of a professional service rendered or to give a professional opinion	 $27 per day
 For travel to court	 Reasonable travelling expenses actually incurred, but not exceeding the kilometre allowance set out in Regulation 11 of the Revised Regulations of Ontario, 1990 (Kilometre Allowances) made under the Act.
 Note: This is an unofficial presentation of the fees prescribed by an Ontario regulation. For an official version of the Small Claims Court – Fees and Allowances regulation, refer to Ontario Regulation 332/16 .

 Other fees
 There may be other fees which apply to your case depending on the steps you take. For example, if you need to take steps to enforce your judgment, you may need to pay some of the fees listed in the Sheriffs – Fees regulation. If you wish to appeal the judge’s decision at trial, you will need to pay fees listed in the Fees for Court Transcripts regulation for the preparation of a transcript of your case, as well as a fee for filing your appeal. Remember, you should always refer to the actual regulations to determine the fees that you will need to pay.
 Kilometre allowances
 If payment of a travel or kilometre allowance is authorized and the authorizing instrument states that the allowance shall be in accordance with or as set out in R.R.O. 1990, Regulation 11 , the allowance for each kilometre actually travelled is:
 in northern Ontario, 30.5 cents
 in southern Ontario, 30 cents
 For the purpose of determining kilometre allowances under the regulation, northern Ontario includes:
 all of The District Municipality of Muskoka
 everything lying north of the line consisting of Healey Lake (Municipal) Road from Healey Lake easterly to its junction with Highway 612
 everything lying north of the line consisting of Highway 60 easterly to its junction with Highway 62 at Killaloe Station and Highway 62 to Pembroke
 Note: This is an unofficial presentation of the travel allowances prescribed by an Ontario regulation. For an official version of the Kilometre Allowances regulation, refer to R.R.O. 1990, Regulation 11 .

 Fees payable to the sheriff
 The sheriff is responsible for enforcing certain court and tribunal orders. The duties of the sheriff are carried out by the Enforcement Office. Learn more about enforcing a judgment .
 Fees are paid to the Enforcement Office at the time an enforcement request is filed, either in person or by mail. The following fees are payable to the sheriff:
 Step in a Proceeding	 Fee
 For up to three attempts, whether or not successful, to serve a document	 $100 for each person to be served
 For filing or renewing a writ of execution or order that a sheriff is liable or required to enforce and for delivering a copy of the writ or order or a renewal of it to the land registrar of a land titles division	 $100
 For filing or renewing a writ of execution or order that a sheriff is liable or required to enforce and that is not required to be delivered to a land registrar of a land titles division	 $75
 For filing a writ of seizure or a direction to seize under the Repair and Storage Liens Act 	 $115
 For each attempt, whether or not successful, to enforce a writ of delivery, a writ of sequestration, an order for interim recovery of personal property, an order for interim preservation of personal property, or a writ of seizure or direction to seize under the Repair and Storage Liens Act 	 $400
 For each attempt, whether or not successful, to enforce a writ of seizure and sale or an order directing a sale	 $240
 For each attempt, whether or not successful, to enforce any other writ of execution or order	 $240
 For a search for writs	 $12.65 per name
 For each report showing the details of a writ, lien or order or for a copy of a writ, lien or order	 $6.90 for each report to a maximum of $69.00 for each name searched.
 For preparing a schedule of distribution under the Creditors’ Relief Act 	 $45 per writ or notice of garnishment listed on the schedule, up to a maximum fee of an amount equal to 20 per cent of the money received.
 For a calculation for satisfaction of writs and garnishments	 $45 per writ or notice of garnishment
 For any service or act ordered by a court for which no fee is provided	 $55 for each hour (or part of an hour) spent performing the service or doing the act
 For making copies of documents, other than writs of execution, orders and certificates of lien, not requiring certification 	 $1 per page
 For making copies of documents, other than writs of execution, orders and certificates of lien, requiring certification 	 $3.50 per page
 In addition to these fees set out above, the person who requests the service shall pay the sheriff their reasonable and necessary disbursements in providing the services described in those paragraphs.
 The person who requests the service shall also pay the sheriff a travel allowance as set out in R.R.O. 1990, Regulation 11 (Kilometre Allowances) , for the distance they travel, both ways, between the court house and the place where the sheriff:
 enforces or attempts to enforce a writ or order or
 performs or attempts to perform any other service directed by a court
 Note: This is an unofficial presentation of the fees and disbursements prescribed by an Ontario regulation. For a full version of the Sheriffs – Fees regulation, refer to Ontario Regulation 294/92 .

 Fees for court transcripts
 Authorized Court Transcriptionists are individuals who are specifically trained and qualified to transcribe audio recordings of court hearings. Learn how to order a court transcript.
 The following fees are payable to an Authorized Court Transcriptionist:
 Service	 Fee
 To transcribe all or part of a recording and provide a certified transcript in electronic format	 $6.30 per page or $25.00, whichever is greater
 To transcribe all or part of a recording and provide a certified transcript in electronic format, to be provided within five business days	 $8.80 per page or $25.00, whichever is greater
 To transcribe all or part of a recording and provide a certified transcript in electronic format, to be provided within 24 hours	 $11.75 per page or $25.00, whichever is greater
 To transcribe all or part of a recording and provide a first certified transcript in paper format	 $7.10 per page or $25.00, whichever is greater
 To transcribe all or part of a recording and provide a first certified transcript in paper format, to be provided within five business days	 $9.60 per page or $25.00, whichever is greater
 To transcribe all or part of a recording and provide a first certified transcript in paper format, to be provided within 24 hours	 $12.55 per page or $25.00, whichever is greater
 For a certified transcript, in paper format, of any part of a recording that has already been transcribed	 $0.80 per page or $25.00, whichever is greater
 For a certified transcript, in electronic format, of any part of a recording that has already been transcribed, if ordered together with a certified transcript in paper format following transcription	 No charge
 For a certified transcript, in electronic format, of any part of a recording that has already been transcribed, if not ordered together with a certified transcript in paper format following transcription	 $25.00
 To transcribe all or part of a recording and provide a transcript in an accessible electronic format.	 The fee for an electronic transcript depends on the number of pages. This applies to standard turnaround times: five days or 24 hours. The fee is set before the transcript is made accessible
 For a transcript, in an accessible electronic format, of any part of a recording that has already been transcribed, if ordered together with a certified transcript following transcription	 No charge
 For a transcript, in an accessible electronic format, of any part of a recording that has already been transcribed, if ordered at any other time	 $25.00
 Note: This is an unofficial presentation of the fees prescribed by an Ontario regulation. For an official version of the Fees for Court Transcripts regulation, refer to Ontario Regulation 94/14.

 Paying Small Claims Court fees online
 Starting October 14, 2025, there are different online portals to file court documents online depending on the region you are filing in.
 Use the Ontario Courts Public Portal for matters in the Toronto region.
 Use the Justice Services Online portal for matters outside of Toronto.
 If there is a fee associated with your submission, you can pay online through these portals or request a fee waiver .

 Updated: October 24, 2025

 Published: October 12, 2021

 Top