Connect with supports for survivors of violence | ontario.ca

 

 Skip to main content

 Ontario.ca needs JavaScript to function properly and provide you with a fast, stable experience.

 To have a better experience, you need to:

 Go to your browser's settings
 Enable JavaScript

 Log in to continue

 Please log in for full account access.

 Connect with supports for survivors of violence

 Find out where to get help for yourself or someone else.
 Exit this page
 Talk to someone
 If you are in danger, call 911 or your local police immediately.
 If there is no immediate danger, you can connect with free and confidential helplines 24 hours a day.

 On this page
 Skip this page navigation

 Helplines
 These helplines are free and confidential. You can talk to someone 24 hours a day no matter where you are in the province.
 The helplines offer:
 someone to talk to
 crisis counselling
 emotional support
 safety planning
 legal information
 other assistance
 Assaulted Women's Helpline
 Get 24/7 crisis counselling and referrals to services, shelters, legal advice and other help for all women and their dependents who have experienced or are at risk of experiencing abuse.
 Support is available in more than 200 different languages, including 17 Indigenous languages.
 Phone Ontario Toll-free: 1-866-863-0511 Toll-free TTY : 1-866-863-7868
 Greater Toronto Area ( GTA ) 416-863-0511 TTY : 416-364-8762
 Mobile (On Fido, Rogers, Bell and Telus networks) #SAFE ( #7233 )
 Live online chat (Monday to Friday between 11 a.m. and 8 p.m.)
 Fem'aide
 Get 24/7 crisis counselling and referral services for Francophone and French-speaking women.
 Phone or text Toll-free: 1-877-336-2433 (1-877-FEMAIDE)
 Live online chat
 Talk4Healing
 Get 24/7 culturally sensitive crisis counselling, advice, and support for all Indigenous women and their families.
 Support is available in English Ojibway, Oji-Cree, Cree, and in 10 other Indigenous languages.
 Phone or text Toll-free: 1-855-554-4325 (1-855-554-HEAL) Thunder Bay Crisis Line: 807-346-4357 (807-346-HELP)
 Live online chat
 Victim Support Line
 Get 24/7 access to information and referrals for victims of crime across Ontario in most languages spoken in the province.
 Victims of crime and their families can access a wide range of services, including counselling, financial assistance and other supports.
 Phone Ontario Toll-free: 1-888-579-2888 Greater Toronto Area ( GTA ): 416-314-2447
 Chat online with 211 Ontario (Monday to Friday from 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. Eastern Time)
 Support for male survivors of sexual abuse
 Get 24/7 multilingual crisis and referral services for male survivors of sexual abuse, both recent and historical.
 Supports include counselling, peer support, and referrals to community support services to meet long-term needs.
 Phone Toll-free: 1-866-887-0015
 211 Ontario helpline
 Get 24/7 help connecting to community, social, health-related and government services in your local area. Help is available in more than 150 languages.
 Phone or text 211 Toll-free: 1-877-330-3213 Toll-free TTY : 1-888-340-1001
 Live chat service available Monday to Friday from 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. Eastern Time.
 Emergency shelters and women's shelters
 Emergency shelters provide security for women and their children fleeing violence and abuse by offering protection, hope and support.
 To find an emergency shelter in your area, call a helpline or visit ShelterSafe Canada .
 Find shelters for Indigenous women and children.
 Sexual assault centres
 Survivors of sexual assault can access a range of services through these centres, including a 24-hour crisis line, counselling, peer support, advocacy, and somebody to accompany you to hospitals, court and other services.
 Find a sexual assault centre near you.
 Domestic violence treatment centres
 Get hospital-based emergency care for people who have recently experienced sexual and/or intimate partner violence. Services can include access to specialized medical care and counselling.
 Visit the Ontario Network of Sexual Assault and Domestic Violence Treatment Centres website to find help in your region.
 Supports for Indigenous women
 Indigenous Healing and Wellness Strategy
 Learn about Indigenous-designed and delivered programs and services to improve Indigenous healing, health and wellness, and to reduce violence against Indigenous women and children.
 Provincial healing lodges
 Healing lodges offer bed-based and/or day programs using traditional Indigenous healing and contemporary therapeutic interventions to:
 reduce the impacts and trauma from sexual assault, physical, mental and emotional abuse or family instability
 promote the spiritual, emotional, mental, and physical well-being of Indigenous people and families
 foster the healing, rebuilding, and strengthening of individual and family relationships
 Learn more about provincial healing lodges and how you can connect with their services.
 Shelters for Indigenous women and children
 These shelters provide safe and short-term residences for women and their children fleeing domestic abuse. Counselling and other culturally appropriate supports are also available.
 Learn more about shelters for Indigenous women and children, and how to connect with their services.
 Mental health and addictions treatment
 Almost 30% of Ontarians will experience a mental health or addiction problem at some point in their lives.
 Find free and confidential mental health and addictions services in your community for yourself or someone you know.
 Legal advice
 Legal Aid Ontario
 Legal Aid Ontario ( LAO ) provides legal help in English and French for low&#8209;income Ontarians regarding:
 family law
 refugee and immigration law
 criminal law
 mental health law
 clinic law
 If you have experienced domestic violence and need help with a family law matter, please call LAO 's contact centre immediately:
 Phone Toll-free: 1-800-668-8258 Greater Toronto Area ( GTA ): 416-979-1446 TTY : 711
 Independent Legal Advice
 If you are a victim of sexual assault living in Ontario and would like to speak to a lawyer, you may be eligible for up to 4 hours of free legal advice by phone or video (for example, Skype or Zoom). This service does not include legal representation in court.
 This service is confidential and is available any time after a sexual assault has occurred.
 Victim services
 For additional information about services for victims of crime:
 visit the online Victim Services Directory
 chat online with 211 Ontario (Monday to Friday from 7 a.m. 9 p.m. Eastern Time)
 Family Court Support Worker program
 Family court support workers provide direct support to victims of domestic violence who are involved in the family court process.
 Victim Crisis Assistance Ontario
 The Victim Crisis Assistance Ontario program provides crisis intervention services to victims of crime and tragic circumstances 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
 In addition to on-site crisis intervention, other services offered through the program include:
 safety planning for all eligible victims of crime
 referrals to appropriate community supports and services
 needs assessments and customized service plans
 assistance to eligible victims with applications to the Victim Quick Response Program+
 enhanced support for vulnerable victims
 referrals to community agencies
 Visit the victim service directory to find a Victim Crisis Assistance of Ontario provider in your community .
 Victim Quick Response Program+
 The Victim Quick Response Program+ provides short-term support for essential expenses for victims, their immediate family members and witnesses in the immediate aftermath of a violent crime to help:
 reduce the impact of the crime
 enhance safety
 meet immediate practical needs
 This program supports individuals who have no other financial means ( e.g. private insurance) and where there is no publicly funded program available.
 Eligible applicants can access supports for critical needs, such as:
 emergency home safety expenses
 practical expenses and basic necessities
 travel and related expenses
 crime scene clean-up
 short-term counselling services
 support required for serious injuries
 basic funeral expenses for families of homicide victims
 To apply for the program, you must be assessed for eligibility with a local service provider. If you are eligible, the service provider will assist you with your application to the program.
 Visit the victim service directory to find a service provider in your community .
 Victim/Witness Assistance Program
 The Victim/Witness Assistance Program provides information, assistance and support to victims and witnesses of crime throughout the criminal court process to improve their understanding of, and participation in, the criminal court process.
 Learn more about the Victim/Witness Assistance Program or visit the Victim Services Directory to find assistance in your community .
 Help for child victims and child witnesses
 The Child Victim/Witness Program offers support and services to child victims and witnesses during the criminal court process.
 In areas where a Child Victim/Witness Program is not available, the Victim/Witness Assistance Program can provide similar services.
 Visit the victim service directory to find assistance in your community .
 Vulnerable Victims and Family Fund
 The Vulnerable Victims and Family Fund helps victims of crime participate more fully in the criminal court process.
 Financial and court-based supports include:
 travel to attend key court dates
 language interpretation services (does not include instances where the Language Interpreters Services Program applies)
 special accommodations for victims with disabilities, such as real-time captioning or other equipment
 Basic necessities for victims of human trafficking while at court
 Victims of crime and families of homicide victims should apply through Ontario's Victim/Witness Assistance Program. Visit the victim service directory to find assistance in your community .
 Affordable housing
 Learn about programs to help you find a safe and affordable place to call home , including help for victims and survivors of intimate partner violence and human trafficking.
 Employment and job training services
 Programs for women's economic empowerment
 These programs provide skills, knowledge and experience to help women increase their economic opportunities. They:
 provide training for women with low incomes and for women who have experienced violence
 equip women with the skills to start a small business or get a job in fields such as the skilled trades or information technology
 build Indigenous women's leadership
 provide food, transportation and access to childcare in some cases
 Employment Ontario
 Learn how to get training, build skills or find a job.
 Hide your internet activity
 If you are concerned that someone is trying to see where you have been online, there are steps you can take to stay safe.
 Learn how to hide your internet activity.

 Updated: April 01, 2026

 Published: April 30, 2020

 Top