Family court fees | ontario.ca

 Skip to main content

 Ontario.ca needs JavaScript to function properly and provide you with a fast, stable experience.

 To have a better experience, you need to:

 Go to your browser's settings
 Enable JavaScript

 Log in to continue

 Please log in for full account access.

 Family court fees

 Learn about fees for family proceedings in Ontario courts.

 Changing how you access the courts in Toronto

 The Justice Services Online platform will no longer accept electronic submissions for Toronto matters due to the transition to the new Ontario Courts Public Portal ( OCPP ). For urgent or time-sensitive filings, please file in-person at the court counter or contact the appropriate court location by email. Counter services will remain open for in-person filings, with extended hours of operations from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.

-->

 On this page
 Skip this page navigation

 Note

 The fee amounts on this page come into effect starting January 1, 2023. To see the fee amounts in effect before that date, view the regulation(s) on e-Laws .

--> Overview
 Family court proceedings are conducted in the following courts:
 the Superior Court of Justice
 the Family Court branch of the Superior Court of Justice (sometimes called the Unified Family Court)
 the Ontario Court of Justice
 Appeals of family court orders may also be heard in the Divisional Court branch of the Superior Court of Justice or the Court of Appeal.
 Depending on the court where your family proceeding is being heard, and the subject matter of your case, you may need to pay court fees for some steps, including:
 filing an application or notice of appeal
 filing an answer
 listing the application for hearing
 Court fees are set out in regulations made under the Administration of Justice Act . To be sure that you have the current fee schedules, always refer to the legislation on the Ontario government’s e-Laws website .
 Court and enforcement fees are payable in Canadian dollars, and may be paid by:
 cash (at the court or Enforcement Office)
 cheque or money order, payable to the Minister of Finance (either at the court, Enforcement Office or by mail)
 debit card (in person and when filing family court documents online )
 credit card (in person, over the phone and when filing family court documents online )
 Find court address and contact information.
 If you cannot afford to pay the fees
 If you cannot afford to pay court fees in your court proceeding, you may request a fee waiver. If you are granted a fee waiver, it will apply to most fees in your court proceeding from that point forward.
 Find out how to apply for a fee waiver .
 Family appeal fees
 You must pay fees to appeal an order in a family court proceeding unless you have a fee waiver certificate .
 For the purposes of court fees, family appeals are treated like civil court proceedings. .
 Superior Court of Justice and Family Court branch fees
 Disclaimer
 The information in this section is an unofficial presentation of the fees prescribed by two Ontario regulations. For official versions of these regulations, refer to:
 Ontario Regulation 293/92 , Superior Court of Justice and Court of Appeal – Fees
 Ontario Regulation 417/95 , Superior Court of Justice – Family Court – Fees

 The fees listed in the table below are for family proceedings in the Superior Court of Justice. In some cases, they also apply to the Family Court branch of the Superior Court of Justice, based on the case's subject matter.
 There are different fees payable in Family appeals .
 Along with the fees in the table below, anyone filing an application or an answer with a divorce claim must include the federal government’s $10 fee. This is set out in the Central Registry of Divorce Proceedings Fee Order , SOR/86-547 , a regulation under the Divorce Act (Canada) .
 Types of payable fees	 Amount in dollars
 1. On the filing of an application [1] 	 $214.00
 2. On the filing of an answer, other than an answer referred to in item 3 [1] 	 $171.00
 3. On the filing of an answer where the answer includes a request for a divorce by a respondent	 $214.00
 4. On the placing of an application on the list for hearing [1] 	 $445.00
 5. On the issue of a summons to a witness	 $33.00
 6. On the issue of a certificate with not more than five pages of copies of the Court document annexed	 $25.00
 7. Making copies of documents
 i. Not requiring certification (per page)
 $1.00
 ii. Requiring certification (per page)
 $4.00
 8. For making up and forwarding papers, documents and exhibits (plus any applicable transportation costs)	 $105.00
 9. For a copy on compact disc ( CD ) of a digital recording of a court hearing in respect of a case, if such a recording exists and a copy is available
 i. For a single day’s recording
 $23.00
 ii. For each additional day’s recording, if the request is made at the same time
 $11.00
 Ontario Court of Justice fees
 There are no filing or listing fees in family proceedings in the Ontario Court of Justice. There are only fees for copies of documents and copies of recordings.
 Types of payable fees	 Amount in dollars
 1. For copies of documents not requiring certification (per page)	 $1.00
 2. For copies of documents requiring certification (per page)	 $3.50
 3. For a copy on compact disc ( CD ) of a digital recording of a court hearing in respect of a case, if such a recording exists and a copy is available,
 i. For a single day’s recording
 $22.00
 ii. For each additional day’s recording, if the request is made at the same time
 $10.50
 [1 ^ ]These fees do not apply in proceedings in the Family Court branch under the Child, Youth and Family Services Act, 2017 , the Children’s Law Reform Act , the Family Law Act (except Parts I and II ), the Family Responsibility and Support Arrears Enforcement Act, 1996 , the Marriage Act or the Interjurisdictional Support Orders Act, 2002 . They also do not apply in proceedings to enforce a parenting order, contact order or order for support made under one of these acts.
 Sherriff fees (Enforcement Office)
 The sheriff is responsible for enforcing certain court orders and judgments. The duties of the sheriff are carried out by the Enforcement Office.
 Fees are paid to the Enforcement Office at the time an enforcement request is filed, either in person or by mail.
 Find out more about enforcement fees .
 Other fees
 There may be other fees that apply to your case depending on the steps you take. For example, if you wish to appeal the judge’s decision at trial, you will need to pay fees listed in the Fees for Court Transcripts regulation for the preparation of a transcript of your case.
 Fee to use the Online Child Support Service
 The Online Child Support Service can be used in many situations to set up or update child support. It is an alternative to going to court.
 There is a non-refundable $80 fee each time you use the service, whether you’re setting up or updating child support. This fee is prescribed under Ontario Regulation 190/15 , Administrative Calculation and Recalculation of Child Support .
 A fee waiver may be available if you cannot afford to pay the $80 fee.
 Learn more about setting up or updating child support online .
 Fees and allowances payable to witnesses
 Witnesses are the people who help you prove your case by providing evidence to the court if you go to trial.
 If you summons a witness to attend your trial, you must pay attendance money to the witness at the time you personally serve them. Attendance money includes:
 a fee for the witness to attend court each day
 travel expenses to get to court
 In family proceedings, the attendance money payable is set out in Rule 23 of the Family Law Rules .
 Fees for court transcripts
 A court transcript is a certified written record of a court hearing. Authorized Court Transcriptionists are individuals who are legally authorized to prepare certified court transcripts by the Attorney General. They are specifically trained and qualified to transcribe audio recordings of court hearings.
 The fees payable to an Authorized Court Transcriptionist are prescribed in Ontario Regulation 94/14 , Fees for Court Transcripts .
 Learn how to order a court transcript.
 Paying family court fees online
 Starting October 14, 2025, there are different online portals to file court documents online depending on the region or level of court you are filing in.
 Use the Ontario Courts Public Portal for matters in the Toronto region.
 Use the Justice Services Online portal for matters outside of Toronto.
 Use the Ontario Court of Appeal Public Portal for matters at the Court of Appeal.
 If there is a fee associated to your submission, you can pay online through these portals or request a fee waiver .

 Updated: April 09, 2026

 Published: December 30, 2022

 Top