
Français
                                Partition Act

                          R.S.O. 1990, Chapter P.4

CONSOLIDATION PERIOD: FROM DECEMBER 15, 2009 TO THE E-LAWS CURRENCY DATE.

Last amendment: 2009, c. 33, Sched. 2, s. 56.

Legislative History: 2006, c. 19, Sched. C, s. 1 (1); 2009,  c.  33,  Sched.
2, s. 56.

Definitions
1 In this Act,
“court” means the Superior Court of Justice; (“tribunal”)
“land” includes lands, tenements, and  hereditaments,  and  all  estate  and
 interests therein. (“bien-fonds”)  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.4, s. 1; 2006, c. 19,
 Sched. C, s. 1 (1).
Section Amendments with date in force (d/m/y)
2006, c. 19, Sched. C, s. 1 (1) - 22/06/2006

Who may be compelled to make partition or sale
2 All joint tenants, tenants in common,  and  coparceners,  all  doweresses,
and parties entitled to dower, tenants by the curtesy, mortgagees  or  other
creditors having liens on, and all parties interested in, to or out of,  any
land in Ontario, may be compelled to make or suffer  partition  or  sale  of
the land, or any part thereof, whether the estate is legal and equitable  or
equitable only.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.4, s. 2.

Who may bring action or make application for partition
3 (1)  Any person interested in land in Ontario, or the guardian of a  minor
entitled to the immediate possession of an  estate  therein,  may  bring  an
action or make an application for the partition of  such  land  or  for  the
sale thereof under the directions of the court if such  sale  is  considered
by the court to be more advantageous  to  the  parties  interested.   R.S.O.
1990, c. P.4, s. 3 (1).

When proceedings may be commenced
(2)  Where the land is held  in  joint  tenancy  or  tenancy  in  common  or
coparcenary by reason of a devise or an intestacy, no  proceeding  shall  be
taken until one year after the decease  of  the  testator  or  person  dying
intestate in whom the land was vested.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.4, s. 3 (2).

Appointment of guardian to estate of person unheard of for three years
4 (1)  Where a person interested in the land  has  not  been  heard  of  for
three years or upwards and it is uncertain whether such person is living  or
dead, the court upon the application of any one interested in the  land  may
appoint a guardian to take charge of the interest  of  such  person  and  of
those who, in the event of his or her being dead, are  entitled  to  his  or
her share or interest in the land.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.4, s. 4 (1).

Powers of such guardian
(2)  The guardian shall, in the proceeding, represent the absent person  and
those who, if he or she is dead,  are  entitled  to  his  or  her  share  or
interest in the land, and  whether  they  or  any  of  them  are  minors  or
otherwise under disability, and his or her acts in relation  to  such  share
or interest are binding on the absent person  and  all  others  claiming  or
entitled to claim under or through him, and are as valid as if done  by  him
or her or them.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.4, s. 4 (2).

Power of the court to deal with the estate
(3)  The court upon  proof  of  such  absence  of  such  person  as  affords
reasonable  ground  for  believing  such  person  to  be  dead,   upon   the
application  of  the  guardian,  or  any  one  interested  in   the   estate
represented by the guardian, may deal with the estate or  interest  of  such
person, or the proceeds thereof, and may order payment of the  proceeds,  or
the income or produce thereof, to the  person  who,  in  the  event  of  the
absent person being dead, appears to be entitled to the same.  R.S.O.  1990,
c. P.4, s. 4 (3).

Sales including estates in dower or by the curtesy or for life
5 (1)  In a proceeding for partition or administration, or in  a  proceeding
in which a sale of land in lieu of partition is ordered, and  in  which  the
estate of a tenant in dower  or  tenant  by  the  curtesy  or  for  life  is
established, if the person entitled to the estate  is  a  party,  the  court
shall determine whether the estate ought to be exempted  from  the  sale  or
whether it should be sold, and in making such determination regard shall  be
had to the interests of all the parties.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.4, s. 5 (1).

What to pass to purchaser
(2)  If a sale  is  ordered  including  such  estate,  all  the  estate  and
interest of every such tenant passes thereby, and no conveyance  or  release
to the purchaser shall be required from such tenant, and the purchaser,  the
purchaser’s heirs and assigns, hold the premises freed and  discharged  from
all claims by virtue of the estate or interest of any such  tenant,  whether
the same be to any undivided share or to  the  whole  or  any  part  of  the
premises sold.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.4, s. 5 (2).

Compensation to owners of particular estates
(3)  The court may direct the payment of  such  sum  in  gross  out  of  the
purchase money to the person entitled to dower or estate by the  curtesy  or
for  life,  as  is  considered,  upon  the  principles  applicable  to  life
annuities, a reasonable satisfaction for such  estate,  or  may  direct  the
payment to the person entitled  of  an  annual  sum  or  of  the  income  or
interest to be derived from the purchase  money  or  any  part  thereof,  as
seems just, and for that purpose may make such order for the  investment  or
other  disposition  of  the  purchase  money  or  any  part  thereof  as  is
necessary.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.4, s. 5 (3).

Effect upon persons under a disability
6  A  partition  or  sale  made  by  the  court  is  as  effectual  for  the
apportioning or conveying away of the estate or interest of a party  to  the
proceedings by which the sale or partition is made  or  declared  who  is  a
minor or is incapable as defined in the Substitute Decisions Act,  1992,  as
of a party who is competent  to  act.   R.S.O.  1990,  c. P.4,  s. 6;  2009,
c. 33, Sched. 2, s. 56.
Section Amendments with date in force (d/m/y)
2009, c. 33, Sched. 2, s. 56 - 15/12/2009

Appeal
7 An appeal lies to the Divisional Court from  any  order  made  under  this
Act.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.4, s. 7.
                            ____________________

Français

Back to top
