
Français
                                 Pounds Act

                          R.S.O. 1990, Chapter P.17

CONSOLIDATION PERIOD:  FROM JANUARY 1, 2007 TO THE E-LAWS CURRENCY DATE.

Last amendment:  2006, c. 32, Sched.C, s. 50.

Legislative History: 1999, c. 12, Sched. A, s. 21; 2002, c.  17,  Sched.  F,
Table; 2006, c. 19, Sched. C, s. 1 (2); 2006, c. 32, Sched. C, s. 50.

Scope of Act
1  This  Act  is  in  force  in  every  local  municipality  but  the  local
municipality may by by-law passed under the Municipal Act, 2001 or the  City
of Toronto Act, 2006, as the case  may  be,  vary  its  application.   2002,
c. 17, Sched. F, Table; 2006, c. 32, Sched. C, s. 50.
Section Amendments with date in force (d/m/y)
2002, c. 17, Sched. F, Table - 01/01/2003
2006, c. 32, Sched. C, s. 50 - 01/01/2007

Liability of owners and others for damage done
2 The owner or occupant of any land is responsible for any damage caused  by
any animal under the person’s charge and keeping as though such animal  were
the person’s own property, and the owner of any animal not permitted to  run
at large by the by-laws of the municipality is liable for  any  damage  done
by  such  animal,  although  the  fence  enclosing  the  premises   of   the
complainant was not of the height required by such  by-laws.   R.S.O.  1990,
c. P.17, s. 2.

Animals not to run at large
3 No cattle, goat, horse, sheep or swine shall be allowed to  run  at  large
in any  part  of  a  territorial  district  not  included  in  an  organized
municipality.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 3; 1999, c. 12, Sched. A, s. 21.
Section Amendments with date in force (d/m/y)
1999, c. 12, Sched. A, s. 21 - 22/12/1999

Owner of animal liable for damages and fine
4 The owner of any cattle, goat, horse, sheep  or  swine  running  at  large
contrary to section 3 is liable in damages for  all  injuries  committed  by
such animal or animals, and also is guilty of an offence and  on  conviction
is liable to a fine of not more than $300.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 4.

What animals to be impounded
5 (1) If not previously replevied, the poundkeeper shall impound any  horse,
bull, ox, cow, sheep, goat, pig or other cattle,  geese  or  other  poultry,
distrained for unlawfully running at large  or  for  trespassing  and  doing
damage, delivered to him or her for that purpose by any person  resident  in
the poundkeeper’s division who has distrained the same.

Poultry
(2) If the owner of geese or other poultry refuses or  neglects  to  prevent
the same from trespassing on the premises of the owner’s neighbour  after  a
notice in writing has been served upon the  owner  of  their  trespass,  the
owner is guilty of an offence and on conviction is liable to a fine  of  not
more than $10.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 5.

Notice to clerk as to animals impounded
6 Where an animal has been impounded, the poundkeeper shall, within  twenty-
four hours, deliver to the clerk of the municipality  a  notice  in  writing
containing a description of the  colour,  age  and  natural  and  artificial
marks of the animal, as nearly as may be.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 6.

When the common pound is not safe
7 When the common pound of the municipality or place wherein a distress  has
been made is not secure, the poundkeeper  may  confine  the  animal  in  any
enclosed place within the limits of the poundkeeper’s division within  which
the distress was made.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 7.

Statement of demand to be delivered to poundkeeper by impounder
8 (1) The person distraining and impounding the animal shall,  at  the  time
of the impounding, deposit poundage fees, if demanded,  and  within  twenty-
four hours thereafter deliver to the  poundkeeper  duplicate  statements  in
writing of the person’s demands against the owner for damages, if  any,  not
exceeding $20, done by such animal, exclusive of poundage  fees,  and  shall
also  give  a  written  agreement,  with  a  surety  if  required   by   the
poundkeeper, in the following form  or  in  words  to  the  same  effect  in
English or in French:
  Form of agreement with poundkeeper
  I (or we, as the case may be) do hereby agree that I or we) will  pay  to
  the owner  of  the  (describing  the  animal),  by  me  (A.B.)  this  day
  impounded, all costs to which the owner may be put in case  the  distress
  by me the said (A.B.) proves to be illegal  or  in  case  the  claim  for
  damages now put in by me the said (A.B.) fails to be established.

Release of animal on security being furnished
(2) The owner of an animal impounded is  entitled  to  it  at  any  time  on
demand made therefor, without  payment  of  any  poundage  fees,  on  giving
satisfactory  security  to  the  poundkeeper  for  all  costs,  damages  and
poundage fees that may be  established  against  the  owner.   R.S.O.  1990,
c. P.17, s. 8.

When animal may be retained by distrainor
9 (1) If the animal distrained is a horse, bull, ox, cow, sheep,  goat,  pig
or other cattle, and if it is distrained by a resident of  the  municipality
for straying in the resident’s premises, instead of  delivering  the  animal
to the poundkeeper, the resident may retain the  animal  in  the  resident’s
own possession, if the resident makes no  claim  for  damages  done  by  the
animal and duly gives the notices hereinafter required.

Notice to owner if known
(2) If the owner is known, the person distraining shall forthwith  give  the
owner notice in writing of having distrained the animal.

If unknown, notice to clerk of municipality
(3) If the owner is unknown, the person  distraining  shall,  within  forty-
eight hours, deliver to the clerk of the municipality a  notice  in  writing
of having distrained the animal containing a description of its colour,  age
and natural and artificial marks, as nearly as may be.

Duty of clerk thereon
(4) The clerk on receiving the notice shall forthwith enter a  copy  thereof
in a book to be kept by the clerk for that purpose and shall post  it  or  a
copy thereof in some conspicuous place on or near the door  of  his  or  her
office and keep it so posted for at least one week,  unless  the  animal  is
sooner claimed by the owner.

If animals worth $10 or over
(5) If the animal or animals distrained at the same time is or  are  of  the
value of $10 or more, the distrainor shall cause a copy of the notice to  be
published in a newspaper in the  area  once  a  week  for  three  successive
weeks.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 9.

Sale after notices
10 If an animal is impounded, notices for the sale thereof  shall  be  given
by the poundkeeper or person  who  impounded  it  within  forty-eight  hours
afterwards, but no pig or poultry shall  be  sold  until  after  four  clear
days, nor any horse or other cattle until after eight clear days,  from  the
time of impounding it.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 10.

If animal is not impounded, but retained
11 If the animal is a pig, goat  or  sheep  and  is  not  impounded  but  is
retained in the possession of the person distraining  it,  the  notices  for
the sale thereof shall not be given for one month, and, if the animal  is  a
horse or other cattle, the notices shall not be given for two  months  after
the animal was distrained.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 11.

Notices of sale unless redeemed
12 The notices of sale shall be posted up for three  clear  successive  days
in three public places in the municipality and shall specify  the  time  and
place at which the animal will be publicly sold, if not sooner replevied  or
redeemed by the owner or some one on the owner’s behalf, paying the  penalty
imposed by law, if any, the  amount  of  the  injury,  if  any,  claimed  or
decided to have been committed by the animal to the property of  the  person
who distrained it,  together  with  the  lawful  fees  and  charges  of  the
poundkeeper and also of the fence-viewers, if any, and the expenses  of  the
animal’s keeping.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 12.

Food to be furnished impounded animal
13 Every poundkeeper and every person who impounds or  confines,  or  causes
to be impounded or confined, an animal in a common pound or in  an  open  or
close pound, or in an enclosed place, shall daily furnish  the  animal  with
good and sufficient food, water and shelter during the whole  time  that  it
continues impounded or confined.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 13.

Recovery of expenses
14 (1)  Every such person who furnishes  an  animal  with  food,  water  and
shelter may recover the value thereof from the owner of the animal and  also
a reasonable allowance for the person’s time, trouble and attendance in  the
premises.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 14 (1).

Procedure for recovery
(2)  Such value and  allowance  may  be  recovered  with  costs  by  summary
proceeding before the Ontario Court of Justice  in  like  manner  as  fines,
penalties or forfeitures for the breach of a by-law of the  municipality  in
which the animal was impounded may by law be recovered and enforced  by  the
court, and the court shall ascertain and determine the amount of such  value
and allowance  when  not  otherwise  fixed  by  law,  adhering,  so  far  as
possible, to the tariff of poundkeeper’s fees  and  charges  established  by
the by-laws of the municipality.  R.S.O.  1990,  c. P.17,  s. 14 (2);  2006,
c. 19, Sched. C, s. 1 (2).
Section Amendments with date in force (d/m/y)
2006, c. 19, Sched. C, s. 1 (2) - 22/06/2006

Other mode of enforcing
15 The poundkeeper or person so entitled to proceed  may,  instead  of  such
summary  proceeding,  enforce  the  remuneration  to  which  the  person  is
entitled in the manner hereinafter mentioned.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 15.

Procedure for sale and disposal of proceeds
16 If it is proved by an affidavit sworn before a justice of the peace  that
the proper notices had been duly posted and published, then,  if  the  owner
or some one for the owner does not, before the sale of the  animal,  replevy
or redeem it, the poundkeeper  who  impounded  it  or,  if  the  person  who
distrained it did not deliver it to a poundkeeper but  retained  it  in  the
person’s own possession, any poundkeeper of the  municipality  may  publicly
sell it to the highest bidder  at  the  time  and  place  mentioned  in  the
notices, and, after deducting the penalty and the damages, if any,  and  the
fees and charges, shall apply the proceeds in discharge of the value of  the
food and nourishment, loss of time, trouble and attendance so supplied,  and
of the expenses of driving or conveying  and  impounding  or  confining  the
animal, and of the sale and attending it, or incidental thereto, and of  the
damage when legally  claimable,  not  exceeding  $20,  done  by  it  to  the
property of the person by whom or at whose instance it was  distrained,  and
shall return the surplus, if any, to its original owner, or, if not  claimed
by the owner within three months after the sale, the poundkeeper  shall  pay
such surplus to the treasurer of the municipality.   R.S.O.  1990,  c. P.17,
s. 16.

Disputes regarding demand for damages, how determined
17 (1) If the owner, within forty-eight hours  after  the  delivery  of  the
statements provided for in section 8  disputes  the  amount  of  damages  so
claimed, the amount shall be decided by the majority of three  fence-viewers
of the municipality, one to be named by the owner of the animal, one by  the
person distraining or claiming damages, and the third by the poundkeeper.

Fence-viewers to view and appraise damage
(2) The fence-viewers or any two of them  shall,  within  twenty-four  hours
after notice of their appointment, view the fence and the ground upon  which
the animal was found doing damage, and determine whether or  not  the  fence
was a lawful one according to the statutes or by-laws in that behalf at  the
time of the trespass and if it was a lawful fence, or,  if  the  animal  was
one not permitted to run at large by the by-laws of the  municipality,  they
shall appraise the damages committed, and, within  twenty-four  hours  after
having made the view, shall deliver to the poundkeeper a  written  statement
signed by at least two of them of their appraisement  and  of  their  lawful
fees and charges.

Where fence not lawful
(3) If, in the case of an animal permitted  to  run  at  large,  the  fence-
viewers decide that the fence was not a lawful one, they  shall  so  certify
in writing under their hands, together with  a  statement  of  their  lawful
fees to the poundkeeper, who shall, upon payment  of  all  lawful  fees  and
charges, deliver such animal  to  the  owner  if  claimed  before  the  sale
thereof, but, if not claimed or if such fees and charges are not  paid,  the
poundkeeper, after due notice as  required  by  this  Act,  shall  sell  the
animal in the manner before mentioned at the time  and  place  appointed  in
the notices.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 17.

Offence
18 Every poundkeeper or person who impounds or confines,  or  causes  to  be
impounded or confined, an animal and refuses  or  neglects  to  provide  and
supply it with good and sufficient food, water and shelter is guilty  of  an
offence and on conviction is liable to a fine, for every  day  during  which
the person is so in default, of not less than  $1  and  not  more  than  $4.
R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 18.

Offence, fence-viewer
19 Every fence-viewer who neglects his or her duty under this Act is  guilty
of an offence and on conviction is liable to a fine  of  $2.   R.S.O.  1990,
c. P.17, s. 19.

Statement to be filed with clerk
20 Every poundkeeper and every person who distrains an animal under  section
9 shall, on or before the 15th day of January in every year, file  with  the
clerk of the municipality a statement for the year ending on  the  31st  day
of December next preceding showing,
      (a)   the number of animals impounded or distrained, as the  case  may
    be;
      (b)   the number of animals sold and the amounts received;
      (c)   the sum received as poundage  fees  and  cost  of  keep  by  the
    poundkeeper or party distraining;
      (d)   the damages paid by any party;
      (e)   all disbursements and to whom paid;
      (f)   any receipts and expenditures in connection  therewith.   R.S.O.
    1990, c. P.17, s. 20.

Certifying statement
21 The statement shall be certified to by  the  poundkeeper  or  the  person
distraining as a true and accurate statement.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 21.

Offence
22 Every poundkeeper or other person  required  to  file  such  return,  who
neglects or refuses to file it on or before the 15th day of January  in  any
year, is guilty of an offence and on conviction is liable to a fine  of  not
more than $2,000.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.17, s. 22.
                               ______________

Français

Back to top
