How to respond to a case &#8211; Ontario Superior Court of Justice

 
 
 

 
 



 
 
 
 

		 Skip to content 

 
 	 
 		 

 
 				 
 					 Case Information
 Court Locations &#038; Scheduling
 Media
 FR

 
 	 
 		 
 			 
 				 
 					 
 						 
 						 Ontario Superior Court of Justice
 

 
 				 
 					 
 						 

								 Search Search 


 
 	 

 		 
 			 
 				 
 					 
 						 

 
 
 
 
 
 Home Areas of Law Small Claims Court How to respond to a case

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 How to respond to a case

 
 
 
 

 If you have been sued, then you are a defendant. The party suing you is the plaintiff. All plaintiffs and defendants in the case are parties.
 You must complete the Defence (Form 9A). This form is available online and at any Small Claims Court office.
 You must serve the Defence on all other parties. Whoever served a party must swear or affirm an Affidavit of Service (Form 8A). This document tells the Court that that party was successfully served. If one person served multiple parties, a separate Affidavit of Service is required for each party. The form is available online and at any Small Claims Court office.
 You must file the Defence with proof with the Court within 20 calendar days from the date you were served with the Claim.
 You may file the Defence through the Small Claims Court Submissions Online Portal. You may also file the Defence in person at any Small Claims Court location.
 IMPORTANT: If you do not serve and file your defence by the deadline, then you may be noted in default and the Court may order judgment against you without your participation. The deadline is generally 20 calendar days from the date you were served with the plaintiff’s claim.

 Guide to Replying to a Claim
 Learn More

 Small Claims Court Submissions Online
 Learn more

	 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Other useful links: 

 
 


 
 
 
 
 

 
 
								 
 
								 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 This website is maintained by the Office of the Chief Justice.

 

 

 
 
 
 
 LinkedIn
 Site Map
 Accessibility
 Feedback
 Website Policies