Default proceedings &#8211; Ontario Superior Court of Justice

 
 
 

 
 



 
 
 
 

		 Skip to content 

 
 	 
 		 

 
 				 
 					 Case Information
 Court Locations &#038; Scheduling
 Media
 FR

 
 	 
 		 
 			 
 				 
 					 
 						 
 						 Ontario Superior Court of Justice
 

 
 				 
 					 
 						 

								 Search Search 


 
 	 

 		 
 			 
 				 
 					 
 						 

 
 
 
 
 
 Home Areas of Law Small Claims Court Default proceedings

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 Guide to Small Claims Court Process Starting and responding to a case Filing Toronto Small Claims Court Cases Default proceedings Settlement conference &#038; Trial Management Conferences Motions Trial Enforcement Guidelines to Determine Hearing Method in the Small Claims Court Legislation Rules of the Small Claims Court Forms Finding Legal Help and Representation

 

 
 
 
 Default proceedings

 
 
 
 

 A defendant generally has 20 calendar days to serve and file a defence to a claim.
 If defence not filed
 If a defendant does not file a defence in time, then the plaintiff may ask the Court to note the defendant in default.
 Even if a defendant is noted in default, a case will proceed to settlement conference as long as one defendant has filed a defence.
 Noting in default
 If you wish to have the Court note a defendant in default, then you need to file a Request to Clerk (Form 9B) .
 Being noted in default has serious consequences . The plaintiff may be entitled to get a judgment against you without your participation. You cannot file a defence or take any other step in the case without the plaintiff’s consent or the Court’s permission.
 If you are noted in default , then you may bring a motion to set aside the noting in default, any default judgment against you and any steps taken to enforce those default judgments. You may also seek the plaintiff’s consent to set these things aside, except for any enforcement steps that have been completed.
 Default judgment
 There are three ways to seek default judgment against a defendant to a plaintiff’s claim:

 Request to Clerk,
 motion in writing for assessment of damages, and
 assessment hearing.

 More information about default proceedings is available at these buttons:

 Asking to have a defendant noted in default
 Learn More

 Asking to set aside default proceedings
 Learn more

	 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Other useful links: 

 
 


 
 
 
 
 

 
 
								 
 
								 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 This website is maintained by the Office of the Chief Justice.

 

 

 
 
 
 
 LinkedIn
 Site Map
 Accessibility
 Feedback
 Website Policies