Accessing a Digital Recording &#038; Ordering Transcripts &#8211; Ontario Superior Court of Justice

 
 
 

 
 



 
 
 
 

		 Skip to content 

 
 	 
 		 

 
 				 
 					 Case Information
 Court Locations &#038; Scheduling
 Media
 FR

 
 	 
 		 
 			 
 				 
 					 
 						 
 						 Ontario Superior Court of Justice
 

 
 				 
 					 
 						 

								 Search Search 


 
 	 

 		 
 			 
 				 
 					 
 						 

 
 
 
 
 
 Home Guides &#038; Resources Access to Court Proceedings, Digital Recordings, Transcripts &#038; Court Records Accessing a Digital Recording &#038; Ordering Transcripts

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 Accessing a Court Proceeding Accessing Court Records Accessing a Digital Recording &#038; Ordering Transcripts Definitions Restrictions on Access to Digital Recordings from DRDs Procedure for Requesting Access to Digital Recordings from DRDs Access to Digital Recordings for Counsel of Record and Prosecutors Access to Digital Recordings for Self-Represented Litigants Access to Digital Recordings for Designated Media Access to Digital Recordings for Members of the Public Access to Digital Recordings for Law Enforcement

 

 
 
 
 Accessing a Digital Recording &#038; Ordering Transcripts

 
 
 
 

 Access To Court Transcripts

 How to Order a Transcript of a Court Proceeding This policy outlines Access to Transcripts of Court Proceedings. Court transcripts are prepared by Authorized Court Transcriptionists and are a certified written record of a court hearing. Information on how to order court transcripts can be found here: “Ordering a Court Transcript” .

 Restrictions on Access to Court Transcripts Unless a judge of the Superior Court of Justice orders otherwise, transcripts are not available to anyone – including the parties – for case, settlement, and trial management conferences.
 Additionally, when the public is excluded from a court proceeding (known as  in camera  proceedings), the public may not have access to records relating to that portion of the proceedings.
 Under Section 87(4) of the Child, Youth and Family Services Act , 2017 (CYFSA), child protection hearings and appeals of child protection decisions are closed to the public unless ordered by the court. Access to transcripts of CYFSA proceedings may only be given to a party to the hearing or a party’s lawyer.

 Access to Digital Court Recordings
 This policy outlines Access to Digital/Audio Court Recordings (hereinafter referred to as “digital recordings”), made from Digital Recording Devices (DRDs), of matters heard in open court.
 Digital recordings are not considered an official court record and cannot be used for appeal purposes.  Access to digital recordings will be granted at the court’s discretion. The use of all digital recordings will be subject to any court order and any common law or statutory restriction on publication applicable to the proceeding.
 All digital recordings are subject to the prohibition set out in s. 136 of the  Courts of Justice Act , which prohibits the broadcast, reproduction, and dissemination of audio recordings. Any person who contravenes s. 136 is guilty of an offence and subject to a penalty, in accordance with s. 136(4) of the  Courts of Justice Act .
 Requests regarding access to the digital recording for any ongoing proceeding will be considered by the presiding judicial official who is seized of the proceeding.
 Where the judicial official who presided at the hearing is not available to consider the request or where no particular judicial official is associated with the proceeding, the Regional Senior Justice or Local Administrative Justice (or his or her delegate) may consider the request.

 Definitions For the purposes of this policy, the following definitions apply:
   “judge” means all judges, associate judges and deputy judges of the Superior Court of Justice.
 “counsel of record” means a lawyer or paralegal, licensed by the Law Society of Ontario, representing a party in the proceeding.
 “prosecutors” means municipal prosecutors; Provincial Crown Attorneys or Assistant Crown Attorneys; and Federal Crown Prosecutors.
 “litigant” means a party in a civil, family, or divisional court proceeding or an accused person in a criminal proceeding.
 “designated media” means members of the media included in the “ Joint Courts’ List of Designated Media for Access to Digital Court Recordings ”
 “members of the public” means anyone who is not a party in the proceeding, including  lawyers or paralegals who are not representing a party in the proceeding; or, members of the media who are not included in the “ Joint Courts’ List of Designated Media for Access to Digital Court Recordings ”

 Restrictions on Access to Digital Recordings from DRDs The release of digital recordings may be subject to any order(s) the presiding judge makes. A judge may expand or restrict access to digital recordings in any proceedings before them.
 Unless a judge orders otherwise, access to digital recordings of the following proceedings is not available to anyone:

 In Criminal Proceedings:

 in camera proceedings or any portion of a proceeding that is heard in camera ; and
 proceedings subject to a statutory, common law or court ordered restriction on the provision of transcripts or digital recordings of the proceeding (e.g., pre-trial conferences held in court with self-represented accused, pursuant to rule  28.05(4) of the Criminal Proceedings Rules for the Superior Court of Justice, or   proceedings under the Youth Criminal Justice Act )

 In Family Proceedings:

 in camera proceedings or any portion of a proceeding that is heard  in   camera ;
 private hearings (e.g. s. 87 of the Child, Youth and Family Services Act ) ;
 proceedings subject to a statutory, common law or court ordered restriction on the provision of transcripts or digital recordings of the proceeding; and,
 all court events, including conferences and motions, except for a trial.

 In Civil Proceedings:

 in camera   proceedings or any portion of a proceeding that is heard  in camera ;
 private or closed hearings;
 proceedings subject to a statutory, common law or court ordered restriction on the provision of transcripts or digital recordings of the proceeding; and,
 case and pretrial conferences; and
  motions and applications (e.g., motions and applications under rule 37 and rule 38 of the Rules of Civil Procedure ).
 All Small Claims Court proceedings (note: the release of a digital recording of a settlement conference and the release of trial management conference recordings is subject to rule 13.03 (4) and r.16.1.02(3) respectively of the Rules of the Small Claims Court ).

 In Divisional Court Proceedings:

 in camera proceedings or any portion of a proceeding that is heard  in camera ;
 private or closed hearings (e.g. pursuant to s. 87 of the  Child, Youth and Family Services Act ) ;
  proceedings subject to a statutory, common law or court ordered restriction on the provision of transcripts or digital recordings of the proceeding (e.g., pre-trial conferences held in court with self-represented accused, pursuant to rule 28.05(4) of the Criminal Proceedings Rules of the Superior Court of Justice (Ontario), proceedings under the  Youth Criminal Justice Act ) ;
 case conferences: and
 motions, applications, and appeals.

 Procedure for Requesting Access to Digital Recordings from DRDs All persons seeking access to digital recordings will be required to complete the request form, undertaking and prescribed fee.  See the information below on your access permissions and what must be done depending on your status as a requestor.
 The Undertaking prescribes the way in which the digital recording is to be used and the terms and conditions under which access to the digital recording is being provided.
 The completed Request Form and Undertaking should be submitted to the appropriate recording management office (the court location where the matter took place). The list of Ontario court locations can be accessed here.

 Access to Digital Recordings for Counsel of Record and Prosecutors In Criminal, Civil, and Divisional Court proceedings counsel of record and prosecutors may access digital recordings of proceedings, or any related proceedings, involving the party they represent.
 In Family proceedings, a judge must authorize the release of digital recordings before counsel of record, or prosecutors can have access. Judicial authorization is sought by completing the Request Form/Undertaking .
 Access to digital recordings is subject to any orders made by a judge, including any restrictions prohibiting access as outlined above.
 In all cases, counsel of record and prosecutors must complete:

 Request Form/Undertaking for Counsel/Licensed Paralegal of Record to the Court for Access to Digital Court Recordings ;  and
 Pay the prescribed fee.

 Access to Digital Recordings for Self-Represented Litigants Unless a judge orders otherwise, a self-represented litigant in a proceeding will not be provided access to digital recordings of proceedings in which they were involved.
 Except for self-represented litigants who are subject to an order made pursuant to s. 140 of the Courts of Justice Acts , self-represented litigants may request access to digital recordings of proceedings in which they were involved if they:

 seek a court order authorizing access by completing the Request Form/Undertaking to the Court for Access to Digital Court Recordings ; and
 Pay the Prescribed Fee.

 Self-represented litigants who are subject to an order made pursuant to s. 140 of the Courts of Justice Act must first seek leave of a judge, in accordance with section 140(3) of the Courts of Justice Act , before commencing the process to access digital recordings.

 Access to Digital Recordings for Designated Media In Criminal, Civil, and Divisional Court proceedings media on the Joint Courts’ List of Designated Media for Access to Digital Court Recordings may access digital recordings by:

 completing the Request/Undertaking Form to the Court for Access to Digital Court Recordings ; and
 Paying the Prescribed Fee.

 In Family Proceedings, a judge of the Superior Court of Justice must authorize the release of the digital recording before members of the Joint Courts’ List of Designated Media for Access to Digital Court Recordings can access the digital recording.  Judicial authorization is sought by completing and submitting the Request Form/Undertaking as described above.

 Access to Digital Recordings for Members of the Public Unless a judge of the Superior Court of Justice orders otherwise, members of the public will not be provided access to digital recordings of any court proceedings.
 Except for members of the public who are subject to an order made pursuant to s. 140 of the Courts of Justice Acts , members of the public may request access to digital recordings of proceedings if they:

 seek a court order authorizing access by completing the Request/Undertaking Form to the Court for Access to Digital Court Recordings ; and
 Pay the Prescribed Fee.

 Members of the public who are subject an order made pursuant to s. 140 of the Courts of Justice Act must first seek leave of a judge, in accordance with section 140(3) of the Courts of Justice Act , before commencing the process to access digital recordings.

 Access to Digital Recordings for Law Enforcement Unless a judge of the Superior Court of Justice orders otherwise, law enforcement officers will not be provided access to digital recordings of any court proceedings.
 Law enforcement officers may request access to digital recordings of proceedings if they:

 complete the  Request/Undertaking Form to the Court for Access to Digital Court Recordings ;  and
 Pay the Prescribed Fee.
 The Judicial Official Considering the Request for Access

	 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Other useful links: 

 
 


 
 
 
 
 

 
 
								 
 
								 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 This website is maintained by the Office of the Chief Justice.

 

 

 
 
 
 
 LinkedIn
 Site Map
 Accessibility
 Feedback
 Website Policies