

                      Proceedings Against the Crown Act

                          R.S.O. 1990, Chapter P.27

HISTORICAL VERSION FOR THE PERIOD MAY 17, 2007 TO JULY 24, 2007.

Amended by: 1994, c. 27, s. 51; 1997, c. 16, s. 14; 2004, c. 16, Sched. D,
Table; 2006, c. 21, Sched. F, s. 124; 2007, c. 7, Sched. 34.


Definitions
      1.  In this Act,
“agent”, when used  in  relation  to  the  Crown,  includes  an  independent
 contractor employed by the Crown; (“mandataire”)
“Crown” means Her Majesty the Queen in right of Ontario; (“Couronne”)
“order”  includes  a  judgment,  decree,  rule,   award   and   declaration;
 (“ordonnance”)
“proceeding against the Crown”  includes  a  claim  by  way  of  set-off  or
 counterclaim  raised  in  a  proceeding  by  the  Crown  and  includes  an
 interpleader proceeding to which the Crown is a party;  (“instance  contre
 la Couronne”)
“servant”, when used in relation to the Crown, includes a  minister  of  the
 Crown. (“préposé”)  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 1.

Acts not affected
      2.  (1)  This Act does not affect and is subject to the  Certification
of Titles Act as to claims against The  Certification  of  Titles  Assurance
Fund,  the  Corporations  Tax  Act,  the  Expropriations  Act,  the   Public
Transportation and Highway Improvement Act, the Income  Tax  Act,  the  Land
Titles Act, as to claims against The Land Titles Assurance Fund, the  Mining
Tax Act, the Motor Vehicle Accident Claims Act, the Motor Vehicle  Fuel  Tax
Act, the Retail Sales Tax Act, the Workplace Safety and Insurance Act,  1997
and The Succession Duty Act, being chapter 449 of the  Revised  Statutes  of
Ontario, 1970.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 2 (1); 1997,  c. 16,  s. 14;  2004,
c. 16, Sched. D, Table.

Limits of scope of Act
      (2)  Nothing in this Act,
      (a)   subjects the Crown to greater liability in respect of  the  acts
    or omissions of a servant or agent of the Crown than that to which  the
    Crown would be subject in respect of such acts or omissions if it  were
    a person of full age and capacity; or
      (b)   subjects the Crown to a proceeding under this Act in respect  of
    a cause of action that is enforceable against a  corporation  or  other
    agency of the Crown; or
      (c)   subjects the Crown to a proceeding under this Act in respect  of
    any act or omission of a servant of the Crown unless that  servant  has
    been appointed by or is employed by the Crown; or
      (d)   subjects the Crown to a proceeding under this Act in respect  of
    anything done in the due enforcement of the  criminal  law  or  of  the
    penal provisions of any Act of the Legislature; or
      (e)   authorizes a proceeding against the Crown  under  the  Employers
    and Employees Act.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 2 (2).

Right to sue Crown without fiat
      3.  A claim against the Crown that, if this Act had not  been  passed,
might be enforced by petition of right, subject to the grant of  a  fiat  by
the Lieutenant Governor, may  be  enforced  as  of  right  by  a  proceeding
against the Crown in accordance with this Act without the grant  of  a  fiat
by the Lieutenant Governor.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 3.

Right to sue Crown corporation without consent
      4.  A claim against a corporation of the Crown that, if this  Act  had
not been passed, might be enforced, subject to the consent of a  servant  of
the Crown, may be enforced as of right without such consent.   R.S.O.  1990,
c. P.27, s. 4.

Liability in tort
      5.  (1)  Except  as  otherwise  provided  in  this  Act,  and  despite
section  11  of  the  Interpretation  Act,  the  Crown  is  subject  to  all
liabilities in tort to which, if it were a person of full age and  capacity,
it would be subject,
Note:  Effective October 19, 2007 or on  an  earlier  day  to  be  named  by
proclamation of the Lieutenant Governor, subsection (1) is  amended  by  the
Statutes of Ontario, 2006, chapter 21, Schedule F, section 124  by  striking
out “section 11 of the Interpretation Act”  in  the  portion  before  clause
(a), and substituting  “section  71  of  Part  VI  (Interpretation)  of  the
Legislation Act, 2006”. See:  2006, c. 21, Sched. F, ss. 124, 143 (1).
      (a)   in respect of a  tort  committed  by  any  of  its  servants  or
    agents;
      (b)   in respect of a breach of the duties  that  one  owes  to  one’s
    servants or agents by reason of being their employer;
      (c)   in respect  of  any  breach  of  the  duties  attaching  to  the
    ownership, occupation, possession or control of property; and
      (d)   under any statute, or under any regulation  or  by-law  made  or
    passed under the authority  of  any  statute.   R.S.O.  1990,  c. P.27,
    s. 5 (1).

Where proceedings in tort lie
      (2)  No proceeding shall be brought against  the  Crown  under  clause
(1) (a) in respect of an act or omission of a servant or agent of the  Crown
unless a proceeding in tort in respect  of  such  act  or  omission  may  be
brought against that servant or agent or the personal representative of  the
servant or agent.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 5 (2).

Liability for acts of servants performing duties legally required
      (3)  Where a function is conferred or imposed upon a  servant  of  the
Crown as such, either by a rule of the common law or by or under a  statute,
and that servant commits a tort in the course of  performing  or  purporting
to perform that function, the liability of the Crown in respect of the  tort
shall be such as it would have been if that function had been  conferred  or
imposed by instructions lawfully given by the Crown.  R.S.O. 1990,  c. P.27,
s. 5 (3).

Application of enactments limiting liability of servants of the Crown
      (4)  In  a  proceeding  against  the  Crown  under  this  section,  an
enactment that negatives or limits the liability of a servant of  the  Crown
in respect of a tort committed by that servant applies in  relation  to  the
Crown as  it  would  have  applied  in  relation  to  that  servant  if  the
proceeding against the Crown had been a  proceeding  against  that  servant.
R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 5 (4).

Property vesting in the Crown
      (5)  Where property vests in the Crown independent of the acts or  the
intentions of the Crown, the Crown is not, by virtue of  this  Act,  subject
to liability in tort by reason only of the property being so vested.   2007,
c. 7, Sched. 34, s. 1.

Same
      (5.1)  Property that vests in  the  Crown  as  a  consequence  of  the
dissolution of a corporation by the Crown is  property  that  vests  in  the
Crown independent of the acts or the intentions  of  the  Crown  within  the
meaning of subsection (5).  2007, c. 7, Sched. 34, s. 1.

Same
      (5.2)  Subsection (5) does not  affect  the  liability  of  the  Crown
under this Act in respect of any period after the Crown,  or  a  servant  or
agent of the Crown,
      (a)   in respect of personal property, begins to use the property  for
    Crown purposes; or
      (b)   in respect of land, has registered a notice  against  the  title
    to the property that it intends to use the property for Crown purposes.
     2007, c. 7, Sched. 34, s. 1.

Notice
      (5.3)  Notice under subsection 1  (3)  of  the  Escheats  Act  is  not
notice for the purposes of clause (5.2) (b).  2007, c. 7, Sched. 34, s. 1.

No liability for investigation, etc.
      (5.4)  The Crown is not liable in  tort  by  reason  of  any  activity
conducted either by the Crown or anyone acting on its  behalf  or  with  its
approval to investigate any aspect of property that vests in  the  Crown  in
the manner  described  in  subsection  (5),  to  restore  that  property  to
productive use or to respond to complaints or to preserve public health  and
safety, or similar actions for similar purposes,  including,  without  being
limited to, the following:
      1.    Any action taken for the purpose of  conducting,  completing  or
    confirming an investigation.
      2.    Any action taken  for  the  purpose  of  securing,  managing  or
    maintaining the property, including action to,
       i.     ensure  or  end  the  supply  of   water,   sewage   services,
       electricity, artificial or natural gas, steam, hot  water,  heat  or
       maintenance,
      ii.   secure the property by means of locks, gates,  fences,  security
       guards, cameras or other means, or
      iii.  repair, demolish or remove anything that is or  might  create  a
       safety risk or a hazard.
      3.    Any action taken on the property for the purpose  of  responding
    to,
      i.    any danger to the health or safety of any  person  that  results
       or may result from the presence of anything on the property  or  the
       presence or discharge of a contaminant on, in or under the property,
      ii.   any impairment or serious risk of impairment of the  quality  of
       the natural environment for any use that can  be  made  of  it  that
       results  or  may  result  from  the  presence  or  discharge  of   a
       contaminant on, in or under the property, or
      iii.  any injury or damage or serious risk of injury or damage to  any
       property or to any plant or animal life that results or  may  result
       from the presence or discharge of a contaminant on, in or under  the
       property.
      4.    Any action taken under the Escheats Act.
      5.    Any other action prescribed by  the  regulations.   2007,  c. 7,
    Sched. 34, s. 1.

Regulations
       (5.5)  The  Lieutenant  Governor  in  Council  may  make  regulations
prescribing actions for the  purposes  of  subsection  (5.4).   2007,  c. 7,
Sched. 34, s. 1.

Limitation of liability in respect of judicial acts
      (6)  No proceeding lies  against  the  Crown  under  this  section  in
respect  of  anything  done  or  omitted  to  be  done  by  a  person  while
discharging or  purporting  to  discharge  responsibilities  of  a  judicial
nature vested in the person or  responsibilities  that  the  person  has  in
connection with the execution of judicial process.   R.S.O.  1990,  c. P.27,
s. 5 (6).

Application of law as to indemnity and contribution
      6.  The law relating to indemnity and contribution is  enforceable  by
and against the Crown in respect of any liability to which  it  is  subject,
as if the Crown were a person  of  full  age  and  capacity.   R.S.O.  1990,
c. P.27, s. 6.

Notice of claim
       7.  (1)  Subject  to  subsection  (3),  except  in  the  case  of   a
counterclaim or claim by way of set-off, no action  for  a  claim  shall  be
commenced against the Crown unless the claimant has,  at  least  sixty  days
before the commencement of the action, served on the Crown a notice  of  the
claim containing sufficient particulars to  identify  the  occasion  out  of
which the claim arose, and the Attorney General may require such  additional
particulars as in his or her opinion are necessary to enable  the  claim  to
be investigated.

Limitation period extended
      (2)  Where a notice of a claim is served under subsection  (1)  before
the expiration of the limitation period applying to the commencement  of  an
action for the claim and the sixty-day period referred to in subsection  (1)
expires after the  expiration  of  the  limitation  period,  the  limitation
period is extended to the end of seven days  after  the  expiration  of  the
sixty-day period.

Notice of claim for breach of duty respecting property
      (3)  No proceeding shall be brought against  the  Crown  under  clause
5 (1) (c) unless the notice required by subsection  (1)  is  served  on  the
Crown within ten days after the claim arose.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 7.

Discovery
      8.  In a proceeding against the  Crown,  the  rules  of  court  as  to
discovery and inspection of documents and examination  for  discovery  apply
in the same manner as if the Crown were a corporation, except that,
      (a)   the Crown may refuse to  produce  a  document  or  to  answer  a
    question on the ground that the production or answer would be injurious
    to the public interest;
      (b)   the person who shall attend to be examined for  discovery  shall
    be an official designated by the Deputy Attorney General; and
      (c)   the Crown is not required to deliver an affidavit on  production
    of documents for discovery and inspection, but a list of the  documents
    that the Crown may  be  required  to  produce,  signed  by  the  Deputy
    Attorney General, shall be delivered.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 8.

Designation of Crown in proceeding
      9.  In a proceeding under this Act,  the  Crown  shall  be  designated
“Her Majesty the Queen in right of  Ontario”  or  “Sa  Majesté  du  chef  de
l’Ontario”.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 9.

Service on the Crown
      10.  In  a  proceeding  under  this  Act,  a  document  to  be  served
personally on the Crown shall be served by leaving a copy  of  the  document
with a solicitor in the Crown Law Office (Civil Law) of the Ministry of  the
Attorney General.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 10.

Trial without jury
      11.  In a proceeding against the  Crown,  trial  shall  be  without  a
jury.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 11.

Interpleader
      12.  The Crown may obtain relief by way of an interpleader  proceeding
and may be made a party to such a proceeding in the same manner as a  person
may obtain relief by way of such a proceeding, or be made a  party  thereto,
even though the application for relief is made by a sheriff  or  bailiff  or
other like officer, and the provisions relating to interpleader  proceedings
in the rules of court, subject to this Act, shall have  effect  accordingly.
R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 12.

Rights of parties and authority of court
      13.  Except as  otherwise  provided  in  this  Act,  in  a  proceeding
against the Crown, the rights of the parties are as nearly as  possible  the
same as in a suit between persons, and the court may make any order that  it
may make in a proceeding  between  persons,  and  may  otherwise  give  such
appropriate relief as the case may require.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 13.

No injunction or specific performance against Crown
      14.  (1)  Where in a  proceeding  against  the  Crown  any  relief  is
sought that might, in a proceeding between persons, be  granted  by  way  of
injunction or specific performance, the court  shall  not,  as  against  the
Crown, grant an injunction or make an order for  specific  performance,  but
in lieu thereof may make an order declaratory of the rights of the parties.

Limitation on injunctions and orders against Crown servants
      (2)  The court shall not in any  proceeding  grant  an  injunction  or
make an order against a servant of the Crown if the effect of  granting  the
injunction or making the order would be  to  give  any  relief  against  the
Crown that could not have been obtained in a proceeding against  the  Crown,
but in lieu thereof may make an order  declaratory  of  the  rights  of  the
parties.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 14.

Order for recovery of property not to be made against Crown
      15.  In a proceeding against the Crown in which the recovery  of  real
or personal property is claimed, the court shall not make an order  for  its
recovery or delivery but in lieu thereof may make an  order  declaring  that
the claimant is entitled, as against the Crown, to the property  claimed  or
to the possession thereof.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 15.

Restriction on set-off and counterclaim
      16.  (1)  A person is not entitled to claim a set-off  or  to  make  a
counterclaim in a proceeding by the Crown for the recovery of taxes,  duties
or penalties and is not entitled, in a proceeding of  any  other  nature  by
the Crown, to claim a set-off or make a counterclaim arising out of a  right
or claim to repayment in respect of any taxes, duties or penalties.

Idem
      (2)  Subject to subsection (1), a person may claim a set-off  or  make
a counterclaim in a proceeding by the Crown if  the  subject-matter  of  the
set-off or the counterclaim relates to a matter under the administration  of
the particular government ministry with respect to which the  proceeding  is
brought by the Crown.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 16.

Crown defences
      17.  In a proceeding against the  Crown,  any  defence  that,  if  the
proceeding was between persons, could be relied upon by the defendant  as  a
defence to the proceeding or otherwise may be  relied  upon  by  the  Crown.
R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 17.

No judgment by default against Crown without leave
      18.  In a proceeding against the Crown, judgment shall not be  entered
against the Crown in default of appearance or pleading without the leave  of
the court to be obtained on motion of which notice has  been  given  to  the
Crown.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 18.

Proceedings in rem
      19.  Nothing in this Act authorizes a proceeding in rem in respect  of
any claim against the Crown, or the seizure, attachment,  arrest,  detention
or sale of any property of the Crown.  R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 19.

Interest on judgment debt
      20.  A judgment debt due to or from the Crown bears  interest  in  the
same way as a judgment debt due from one person to  another.   R.S.O.  1990,
c. P.27, s. 20.

Prohibition of execution against the Crown
       21.  (1)  Subject  to  subsections  (2)  and  (3),  no  execution  or
attachment or process in the nature thereof  shall  be  issued  out  of  any
court against the Crown.

Garnishments against Crown
      (2)  A garnishment that is otherwise  lawful  may  issue  against  the
Crown for the payment of money owing or accruing as remuneration payable  by
the Crown for goods or services, subject to section 7 of the Wages Act.

Garnishment for support or maintenance
      (3)  A garnishment may issue against the Crown for an amount owing  or
accruing under an order for support or maintenance, subject to section 7  of
the Wages Act.

Limitation
      (4)  A garnishment is effective against the Crown only in  respect  of
amounts payable on behalf of the administrative unit served with  notice  of
garnishment to the person named in the notice of garnishment.

Regulations
      (5)  The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations,
      (a)   prescribing the method of service on the  Crown  of  notices  of
    garnishment in place of the method prescribed in section 10;
      (b)   providing that a notice of garnishment issued against the  Crown
    is not effective unless a statement of particulars  in  the  prescribed
    form is served with the notice of garnishment;
      (c)   providing that a notice of garnishment issued against the  Crown
    shall be deemed to be served on the day that  is  the  number  of  days
    specified in the regulation after the actual date of service  or  after
    the effective date of service under the rules of court, as the case may
    be, but the regulation shall not specify more than thirty days  as  the
    number of days;
      (d)   prescribing  the  form  of  statement  of  particulars  for  the
    purposes of this section.

Definition
      (6)  In this section,
“administrative unit” means a Ministry  of  the  Government  of  Ontario,  a
 Crown agency within the meaning of the Crown Agency Act or the  Office  of
 the Assembly under the Legislative Assembly Act.   R.S.O.  1990,  c. P.27,
 s. 21.

Payment by Crown
      22.  The Minister  of  Finance  shall  pay  out  of  the  Consolidated
Revenue Fund the amount payable by the Crown,
      (a)   under an order of a court that  is  final  and  not  subject  to
    appeal;
      (b)   under a settlement of a proceeding in a court; or
      (c)   under a settlement of a claim that is the subject  of  a  notice
    of claim under section 7.  1994, c. 27, s. 51.

Conflict
      23.  Where this Act conflicts with any other Act,  this  Act  governs.
R.S.O. 1990, c. P.27, s. 23.
                               ______________



Back to top
