 20  A warrant or summons that is authorized by this Act or an appearance notice, promise to appear, undertaking or recognizance issued, given or entered into in accordance with Part XVI, XXI or XXVII may be issued, executed, given or entered into, as the case may be, on a holiday.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 20
 R.S., c. 2(2nd Supp.), s. 2

 Parties to Offences
 Marginal note: Parties to offence
 21   (1)  Every one is a party to an offence who
 (a)  actually commits it;

 (b)  does or omits to do anything for the purpose of aiding any person to commit it; or

 (c)  abets any person in committing it.

 Marginal note: Common intention
 (2)  Where two or more persons form an intention in common to carry out an unlawful purpose and to assist each other therein and any one of them, in carrying out the common purpose, commits an offence, each of them who knew or ought to have known that the commission of the offence would be a probable consequence of carrying out the common purpose is a party to that offence.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 21

 Marginal note: Person counselling offence
 22   (1)  Where a person counsels another person to be a party to an offence and that other person is afterwards a party to that offence, the person who counselled is a party to that offence, notwithstanding that the offence was committed in a way different from that which was counselled.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (2)  Every one who counsels another person to be a party to an offence is a party to every offence that the other commits in consequence of the counselling that the person who counselled knew or ought to have known was likely to be committed in consequence of the counselling.

 Definition of counsel
 (3)  For the purposes of this Act, counsel includes procure, solicit or incite.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 22
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 7

 Marginal note: Offences of negligence — organizations
 22.1  In respect of an offence that requires the prosecution to prove negligence, an organization is a party to the offence if
 (a)  acting within the scope of their authority
 (i)  one of its representatives is a party to the offence, or

 (ii)  two or more of its representatives engage in conduct, whether by act or omission, such that, if it had been the conduct of only one representative, that representative would have been a party to the offence; and

 (b)  the senior officer who is responsible for the aspect of the organization’s activities that is relevant to the offence departs — or the senior officers, collectively, depart — markedly from the standard of care that, in the circumstances, could reasonably be expected to prevent a representative of the organization from being a party to the offence.

 2003, c. 21, s. 2

 Marginal note: Other offences — organizations
 22.2  In respect of an offence that requires the prosecution to prove fault — other than negligence — an organization is a party to the offence if, with the intent at least in part to benefit the organization, one of its senior officers
 (a)  acting within the scope of their authority, is a party to the offence;

 (b)  having the mental state required to be a party to the offence and acting within the scope of their authority, directs the work of other representatives of the organization so that they do the act or make the omission specified in the offence; or

 (c)  knowing that a representative of the organization is or is about to be a party to the offence, does not take all reasonable measures to stop them from being a party to the offence.

 2003, c. 21, s. 2

 Marginal note: Accessory after the fact
 23   (1)  An accessory after the fact to an offence is one who, knowing that a person has been a party to the offence, receives, comforts or assists that person for the purpose of enabling that person to escape.

 (2)   [Repealed, 2000, c. 12, s. 92]

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 23
 2000, c. 12, s. 92

 Marginal note: Where one party cannot be convicted
 23.1  For greater certainty, sections 21 to 23 apply in respect of an accused notwithstanding the fact that the person whom the accused aids or abets, counsels or procures or receives, comforts or assists cannot be convicted of the offence.
 R.S., 1985, c. 24 (2nd Supp.), s. 45

 Marginal note: Attempts
 24   (1)  Every one who, having an intent to commit an offence, does or omits to do anything for the purpose of carrying out the intention is guilty of an attempt to commit the offence whether or not it was possible under the circumstances to commit the offence.

 Marginal note: Question of law
 (2)  The question whether an act or omission by a person who has an intent to commit an offence is or is not mere preparation to commit the offence, and too remote to constitute an attempt to commit the offence, is a question of law.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 24

 Protection of Persons Administering and Enforcing the Law
 Marginal note: Protection of persons acting under authority
 25   (1)  Every one who is required or authorized by law to do anything in the administration or enforcement of the law
 (a)  as a private person,

 (b)  as a peace officer or public officer,

 (c)  in aid of a peace officer or public officer, or

 (d)  by virtue of his office,

 is, if he acts on reasonable grounds, justified in doing what he is required or authorized to do and in using as much force as is necessary for that purpose.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (2)  Where a person is required or authorized by law to execute a process or to carry out a sentence, that person or any person who assists him is, if that person acts in good faith, justified in executing the process or in carrying out the sentence notwithstanding that the process or sentence is defective or that it was issued or imposed without jurisdiction or in excess of jurisdiction.

 Marginal note: When not protected
 (3)  Subject to subsections (4) and (5), a person is not justified for the purposes of subsection (1) in using force that is intended or is likely to cause death or grievous bodily harm unless the person believes on reasonable grounds that it is necessary for the self-preservation of the person or the preservation of any one under that person’s protection from death or grievous bodily harm.

 Marginal note: When protected
 (4)  A peace officer, and every person lawfully assisting the peace officer, is justified in using force that is intended or is likely to cause death or grievous bodily harm to a person to be arrested, if
 (a)  the peace officer is proceeding lawfully to arrest, with or without warrant, the person to be arrested;

 (b)  the offence for which the person is to be arrested is one for which that person may be arrested without warrant;

 (c)  the person to be arrested takes flight to avoid arrest;

 (d)  the peace officer or other person using the force believes on reasonable grounds that the force is necessary for the purpose of protecting the peace officer, the person lawfully assisting the peace officer or any other person from imminent or future death or grievous bodily harm; and

 (e)  the flight cannot be prevented by reasonable means in a less violent manner.

 Marginal note: Power in case of escape from penitentiary
 (5)  A peace officer is justified in using force that is intended or is likely to cause death or grievous bodily harm against an inmate who is escaping from a penitentiary within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Corrections and Conditional Release Act, if
 (a)  the peace officer believes on reasonable grounds that any of the inmates of the penitentiary poses a threat of death or grievous bodily harm to the peace officer or any other person; and

 (b)  the escape cannot be prevented by reasonable means in a less violent manner.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 25
 1994, c. 12, s. 1

 Marginal note: Definitions
 25.1   (1)  The following definitions apply in this section and sections 25.2 to 25.4.
 competent authority
 autorité compétente
 competent authority means, with respect to a public officer or a senior official,
 (a)  in the case of a member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, personally;

 (b)  in the case of a member of a police service constituted under the laws of a province, the Minister responsible for policing in the province, personally; and

 (c)  in the case of any other public officer or senior official, the Minister who has responsibility for the Act of Parliament that the officer or official has the power to enforce, personally. ( autorité compétente )

 public officer
 fonctionnaire public
 public officer means a peace officer, or a public officer who has the powers of a peace officer under an Act of Parliament. ( fonctionnaire public )
 senior official
 fonctionnaire supérieur
 senior official means a senior official who is responsible for law enforcement and who is designated under subsection (5). ( fonctionnaire supérieur )

 Marginal note: Principle
 (2)  It is in the public interest to ensure that public officers may effectively carry out their law enforcement duties in accordance with the rule of law and, to that end, to expressly recognize in law a justification for public officers and other persons acting at their direction to commit acts or omissions that would otherwise constitute offences.

 Marginal note: Designation of public officers
 (3)  A competent authority may designate public officers for the purposes of this section and sections 25.2 to 25.4.

 Marginal note: Condition — civilian oversight
 (3.1)  A competent authority referred to in paragraph (a) or (b) of the definition of that term in subsection (1) may not designate any public officer under subsection (3) unless there is a public authority composed of persons who are not peace officers that may review the public officer’s conduct.

 Marginal note: Declaration as evidence
 (3.2)  The Governor in Council or the lieutenant governor in council of a province, as the case may be, may designate a person or body as a public authority for the purposes of subsection (3.1), and that designation is conclusive evidence that the person or body is a public authority described in that subsection.

 Marginal note: Considerations
 (4)  The competent authority shall make designations under subsection (3) on the advice of a senior official and shall consider the nature of the duties performed by the public officer in relation to law enforcement generally, rather than in relation to any particular investigation or enforcement activity.

 Marginal note: Designation of senior officials
 (5)  A competent authority may designate senior officials for the purposes of this section and sections 25.2 to 25.4.

 Marginal note: Emergency designation
 (6)  A senior official may designate a public officer for the purposes of this section and sections 25.2 to 25.4 for a period of not more than 48 hours if the senior official is of the opinion that
 (a)  by reason of exigent circumstances, it is not feasible for the competent authority to designate a public officer under subsection (3); and

 (b)  in the circumstances of the case, the public officer would be justified in committing an act or omission that would otherwise constitute an offence.

 The senior official shall without delay notify the competent authority of the designation.

 Marginal note: Conditions
 (7)  A designation under subsection (3) or (6) may be made subject to conditions, including conditions limiting
 (a)  the duration of the designation;

 (b)  the nature of the conduct in the investigation of which a public officer may be justified in committing, or directing another person to commit, acts or omissions that would otherwise constitute an offence; and

 (c)  the acts or omissions that would otherwise constitute an offence and that a public officer may be justified in committing or directing another person to commit.

 Marginal note: Justification for acts or omissions
 (8)  A public officer is justified in committing an act or omission — or in directing the commission of an act or omission under subsection (10) — that would otherwise constitute an offence if the public officer
 (a)  is engaged in the investigation of an offence under, or the enforcement of, an Act of Parliament or in the investigation of criminal activity;

 (b)  is designated under subsection (3) or (6); and

 (c)  believes on reasonable grounds that the commission of the act or omission, as compared to the nature of the offence or criminal activity being investigated, is reasonable and proportional in the circumstances, having regard to such matters as the nature of the act or omission, the nature of the investigation and the reasonable availability of other means for carrying out the public officer’s law enforcement duties.

 Marginal note: Requirements for certain acts
 (9)  No public officer is justified in committing an act or omission that would otherwise constitute an offence and that would be likely to result in loss of or serious damage to property, or in directing the commission of an act or omission under subsection (10), unless, in addition to meeting the conditions set out in paragraphs (8)(a) to (c), he or she
 (a)  is personally authorized in writing to commit the act or omission — or direct its commission — by a senior official who believes on reasonable grounds that committing the act or omission, as compared to the nature of the offence or criminal activity being investigated, is reasonable and proportional in the circumstances, having regard to such matters as the nature of the act or omission, the nature of the investigation and the reasonable availability of other means for carrying out the public officer’s law enforcement duties; or

 (b)  believes on reasonable grounds that the grounds for obtaining an authorization under paragraph (a) exist but it is not feasible in the circumstances to obtain the authorization and that the act or omission is necessary to
 (i)  preserve the life or safety of any person,

 (ii)  prevent the compromise of the identity of a public officer acting in an undercover capacity, of a confidential informant or of a person acting covertly under the direction and control of a public officer, or

 (iii)  prevent the imminent loss or destruction of evidence of an indictable offence.

 Marginal note: Person acting at direction of public officer
 (10)  A person who commits an act or omission that would otherwise constitute an offence is justified in committing it if
 (a)  a public officer directs him or her to commit that act or omission and the person believes on reasonable grounds that the public officer has the authority to give that direction; and

 (b)  he or she believes on reasonable grounds that the commission of that act or omission is for the purpose of assisting the public officer in the public officer’s law enforcement duties.

 Marginal note: Limitation
 (11)  Nothing in this section justifies
 (a)  the intentional or criminally negligent causing of death or bodily harm to another person;

 (b)  the wilful attempt in any manner to obstruct, pervert or defeat the course of justice; or

 (c)  conduct that would violate the sexual integrity of an individual.

 Marginal note: Protection, defences and immunities unaffected
 (12)  Nothing in this section affects the protection, defences and immunities of peace officers and other persons recognized under the law of Canada.

 Marginal note: Compliance with requirements
 (13)  Nothing in this section relieves a public officer of criminal liability for failing to comply with any other requirements that govern the collection of evidence.

 Marginal note: Exception: offences under Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
 (14)  Nothing in this section justifies a public officer or a person acting at his or her direction in committing an act or omission — or a public officer in directing the commission of an act or omission — that constitutes an offence under a provision of Part I of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act or of the regulations made under it.

 2001, c. 32, s. 2
 2005, c. 10, s. 34

 Marginal note: Public officer to file report
 25.2  Every public officer who commits an act or omission — or directs the commission by another person of an act or omission — under paragraph 25.1(9)(a) or (b) shall, as soon as is feasible after the commission of the act or omission, file a written report with the appropriate senior official describing the act or omission.
 2001, c. 32, s. 2

 Marginal note: Annual report
 25.3   (1)  Every competent authority shall publish or otherwise make available to the public an annual report for the previous year that includes, in respect of public officers and senior officials designated by the competent authority,
 (a)  the number of designations made under subsection 25.1(6) by the senior officials;

 (b)  the number of authorizations made under paragraph 25.1(9)(a) by the senior officials;

 (c)  the number of times that acts and omissions were committed in accordance with paragraph 25.1(9)(b) by the public officers;

 (d)  the nature of the conduct being investigated when the designations referred to in paragraph (a) or the authorizations referred to in paragraph (b) were made or when the acts or omissions referred to in paragraph (c) were committed; and

 (e)  the nature of the acts or omissions committed under the designations referred to in paragraph (a), under the authorizations referred to in paragraph (b) and in the manner described in paragraph (c).

 Marginal note: Limitation
 (2)  The annual report shall not contain any information the disclosure of which would
 (a)  compromise or hinder an ongoing investigation of an offence under an Act of Parliament;

 (b)  compromise the identity of a public officer acting in an undercover capacity, of a confidential informant or of a person acting covertly under the direction and control of a public officer;

 (c)  endanger the life or safety of any person;

 (d)  prejudice a legal proceeding; or

 (e)  otherwise be contrary to the public interest.

 2001, c. 32, s. 2

 Marginal note: Written notification to be given
 25.4   (1)  When a public officer commits an act or omission — or directs the commission by another person of an act or omission — under paragraph 25.1(9)(a) or (b), the senior official with whom the public officer files a written report under section 25.2 shall, as soon as is feasible after the report is filed, and no later than one year after the commission of the act or omission, notify in writing any person whose property was lost or seriously damaged as a result of the act or omission.

 Marginal note: Limitation
 (2)  The competent authority may authorize the senior official not to notify the person under subsection (1) until the competent authority is of the opinion that notification would not
 (a)  compromise or hinder an ongoing investigation of an offence under an Act of Parliament;

 (b)  compromise the identity of a public officer acting in an undercover capacity, of a confidential informant or of a person acting covertly under the direction and control of a public officer;

 (c)  endanger the life or safety of any person;

 (d)  prejudice a legal proceeding; or

 (e)  otherwise be contrary to the public interest.

 2001, c. 32, s. 2

 Marginal note: Excessive force
 26  Every one who is authorized by law to use force is criminally responsible for any excess thereof according to the nature and quality of the act that constitutes the excess.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 26

 Marginal note: Use of force to prevent commission of offence
 27  Every one is justified in using as much force as is reasonably necessary
 (a)  to prevent the commission of an offence
 (i)  for which, if it were committed, the person who committed it might be arrested without warrant, and

 (ii)  that would be likely to cause immediate and serious injury to the person or property of anyone; or

 (b)  to prevent anything being done that, on reasonable grounds, he believes would, if it were done, be an offence mentioned in paragraph (a).

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 27

 Marginal note: Use of force on board an aircraft
 27.1   (1)  Every person on an aircraft in flight is justified in using as much force as is reasonably necessary to prevent the commission of an offence against this Act or another Act of Parliament that the person believes on reasonable grounds, if it were committed, would be likely to cause immediate and serious injury to the aircraft or to any person or property therein.

 Marginal note: Application of this section
 (2)  This section applies in respect of any aircraft in flight in Canadian airspace and in respect of any aircraft registered in Canada in accordance with the regulations made under the Aeronautics Act in flight outside Canadian airspace.

 2004, c. 12, s. 2

 Marginal note: Arrest of wrong person
 28   (1)  Where a person who is authorized to execute a warrant to arrest believes, in good faith and on reasonable grounds, that the person whom he arrests is the person named in the warrant, he is protected from criminal responsibility in respect thereof to the same extent as if that person were the person named in the warrant.

 Marginal note: Person assisting
 (2)  Where a person is authorized to execute a warrant to arrest,
 (a)  every one who, being called on to assist him, believes that the person in whose arrest he is called on to assist is the person named in the warrant, and

 (b)  every keeper of a prison who is required to receive and detain a person who he believes has been arrested under the warrant,

 is protected from criminal responsibility in respect thereof to the same extent as if that person were the person named in the warrant.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 28

 Marginal note: Duty of person arresting
 29   (1)  It is the duty of every one who executes a process or warrant to have it with him, where it is feasible to do so, and to produce it when requested to do so.

 Marginal note: Notice
 (2)  It is the duty of every one who arrests a person, whether with or without a warrant, to give notice to that person, where it is feasible to do so, of
 (a)  the process or warrant under which he makes the arrest; or

 (b)  the reason for the arrest.

 Marginal note: Failure to comply
 (3)  Failure to comply with subsection (1) or (2) does not of itself deprive a person who executes a process or warrant, or a person who makes an arrest, or those who assist them, of protection from criminal responsibility.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 29

 Marginal note: Preventing breach of peace
 30  Every one who witnesses a breach of the peace is justified in interfering to prevent the continuance or renewal thereof and may detain any person who commits or is about to join in or to renew the breach of the peace, for the purpose of giving him into the custody of a peace officer, if he uses no more force than is reasonably necessary to prevent the continuance or renewal of the breach of the peace or than is reasonably proportioned to the danger to be apprehended from the continuance or renewal of the breach of the peace.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 30

 Marginal note: Arrest for breach of peace
 31   (1)  Every peace officer who witnesses a breach of the peace and every one who lawfully assists the peace officer is justified in arresting any person whom he finds committing the breach of the peace or who, on reasonable grounds, he believes is about to join in or renew the breach of the peace.

 Marginal note: Giving person in charge
 (2)  Every peace officer is justified in receiving into custody any person who is given into his charge as having been a party to a breach of the peace by one who has, or who on reasonable grounds the peace officer believes has, witnessed the breach of the peace.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 31

 Suppression of Riots
 Marginal note: Use of force to suppress riot
 32   (1)  Every peace officer is justified in using or in ordering the use of as much force as the peace officer believes, in good faith and on reasonable grounds,
 (a)  is necessary to suppress a riot; and

 (b)  is not excessive, having regard to the danger to be apprehended from the continuance of the riot.

 Marginal note: Person bound by military law
 (2)  Every one who is bound by military law to obey the command of his superior officer is justified in obeying any command given by his superior officer for the suppression of a riot unless the order is manifestly unlawful.

 Marginal note: Obeying order of peace officer
 (3)  Every one is justified in obeying an order of a peace officer to use force to suppress a riot if
 (a)  he acts in good faith; and

 (b)  the order is not manifestly unlawful.

 Marginal note: Apprehension of serious mischief
 (4)  Every one who, in good faith and on reasonable grounds, believes that serious mischief will result from a riot before it is possible to secure the attendance of a peace officer is justified in using as much force as he believes in good faith and on reasonable grounds,
 (a)  is necessary to suppress the riot; and

 (b)  is not excessive, having regard to the danger to be apprehended from the continuance of the riot.

 Marginal note: Question of law
 (5)  For the purposes of this section, the question whether an order is manifestly unlawful or not is a question of law.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 32

 Marginal note: Duty of officers if rioters do not disperse
 33   (1)  Where the proclamation referred to in section 67 has been made or an offence against paragraph 68(a) or (b) has been committed, it is the duty of a peace officer and of a person who is lawfully required by him to assist, to disperse or to arrest persons who do not comply with the proclamation.

 Marginal note: Protection of officers
 (2)  No civil or criminal proceedings lie against a peace officer or a person who is lawfully required by a peace officer to assist him in respect of any death or injury that by reason of resistance is caused as a result of the performance by the peace officer or that person of a duty that is imposed by subsection (1).

 Marginal note: Section not restrictive
 (3)  Nothing in this section limits or affects any powers, duties or functions that are conferred or imposed by this Act with respect to the suppression of riots.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 33

 Self-induced Intoxication
 Marginal note: When defence not available
 33.1   (1)  It is not a defence to an offence referred to in subsection (3) that the accused, by reason of self-induced intoxication, lacked the general intent or the voluntariness required to commit the offence, where the accused departed markedly from the standard of care as described in subsection (2).

 Marginal note: Criminal fault by reason of intoxication
 (2)  For the purposes of this section, a person departs markedly from the standard of reasonable care generally recognized in Canadian society and is thereby criminally at fault where the person, while in a state of self-induced intoxication that renders the person unaware of, or incapable of consciously controlling, their behaviour, voluntarily or involuntarily interferes or threatens to interfere with the bodily integrity of another person.

 Marginal note: Application
 (3)  This section applies in respect of an offence under this Act or any other Act of Parliament that includes as an element an assault or any other interference or threat of interference by a person with the bodily integrity of another person.

 1995, c. 32, s. 1

 Defence of Person
 Marginal note: Self-defence against unprovoked assault
 34   (1)  Every one who is unlawfully assaulted without having provoked the assault is justified in repelling force by force if the force he uses is not intended to cause death or grievous bodily harm and is no more than is necessary to enable him to defend himself.

 Marginal note: Extent of justification
 (2)  Every one who is unlawfully assaulted and who causes death or grievous bodily harm in repelling the assault is justified if
 (a)  he causes it under reasonable apprehension of death or grievous bodily harm from the violence with which the assault was originally made or with which the assailant pursues his purposes; and

 (b)  he believes, on reasonable grounds, that he cannot otherwise preserve himself from death or grievous bodily harm.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 34
 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F)

 Marginal note: Self-defence in case of aggression
 35  Every one who has without justification assaulted another but did not commence the assault with intent to cause death or grievous bodily harm, or has without justification provoked an assault on himself by another, may justify the use of force subsequent to the assault if
 (a)  he uses the force
 (i)  under reasonable apprehension of death or grievous bodily harm from the violence of the person whom he has assaulted or provoked, and

 (ii)  in the belief, on reasonable grounds, that it is necessary in order to preserve himself from death or grievous bodily harm;

 (b)  he did not, at any time before the necessity of preserving himself from death or grievous bodily harm arose, endeavour to cause death or grievous bodily harm; and

 (c)  he declined further conflict and quitted or retreated from it as far as it was feasible to do so before the necessity of preserving himself from death or grievous bodily harm arose.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 35

 Marginal note: Provocation
 36  Provocation includes, for the purposes of sections 34 and 35, provocation by blows, words or gestures.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 36

 Marginal note: Preventing assault
 37   (1)  Every one is justified in using force to defend himself or any one under his protection from assault, if he uses no more force than is necessary to prevent the assault or the repetition of it.

 Marginal note: Extent of justification
 (2)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to justify the wilful infliction of any hurt or mischief that is excessive, having regard to the nature of the assault that the force used was intended to prevent.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 37

 Defence of Property
 Marginal note: Defence of personal property
 38   (1)  Every one who is in peaceable possession of personal property, and every one lawfully assisting him, is justified
 (a)  in preventing a trespasser from taking it, or

 (b)  in taking it from a trespasser who has taken it,

 if he does not strike or cause bodily harm to the trespasser.

 Marginal note: Assault by trespasser
 (2)  Where a person who is in peaceable possession of personal property lays hands on it, a trespasser who persists in attempting to keep it or take it from him or from any one lawfully assisting him shall be deemed to commit an assault without justification or provocation.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 38

 Marginal note: Defence with claim of right
 39   (1)  Every one who is in peaceable possession of personal property under a claim of right, and every one acting under his authority, is protected from criminal responsibility for defending that possession, even against a person entitled by law to possession of it, if he uses no more force than is necessary.

 Marginal note: Defence without claim of right
 (2)  Every one who is in peaceable possession of personal property, but does not claim it as of right or does not act under the authority of a person who claims it as of right, is not justified or protected from criminal responsibility for defending his possession against a person who is entitled by law to possession of it.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 39

 Marginal note: Defence of dwelling
 40  Every one who is in peaceable possession of a dwelling-house, and every one lawfully assisting him or acting under his authority, is justified in using as much force as is necessary to prevent any person from forcibly breaking into or forcibly entering the dwelling-house without lawful authority.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 40

 Marginal note: Defence of house or real property
 41   (1)  Every one who is in peaceable possession of a dwelling-house or real property, and every one lawfully assisting him or acting under his authority, is justified in using force to prevent any person from trespassing on the dwelling-house or real property, or to remove a trespasser therefrom, if he uses no more force than is necessary.

 Marginal note: Assault by trespasser
 (2)  A trespasser who resists an attempt by a person who is in peaceable possession of a dwelling-house or real property, or a person lawfully assisting him or acting under his authority to prevent his entry or to remove him, shall be deemed to commit an assault without justification or provocation.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 41

 Marginal note: Assertion of right to house or real property
 42   (1)  Every one is justified in peaceably entering a dwelling-house or real property by day to take possession of it if he, or a person under whose authority he acts, is lawfully entitled to possession of it.

 Marginal note: Assault in case of lawful entry
 (2)  Where a person
 (a)  not having peaceable possession of a dwelling-house or real property under a claim of right, or

 (b)  not acting under the authority of a person who has peaceable possession of a dwelling-house or real property under a claim of right,

 assaults a person who is lawfully entitled to possession of it and who is entering it peaceably by day to take possession of it, for the purpose of preventing him from entering, the assault shall be deemed to be without justification or provocation.

 Marginal note: Trespasser provoking assault
 (3)  Where a person
 (a)  having peaceable possession of a dwelling-house or real property under a claim of right, or

 (b)  acting under the authority of a person who has peaceable possession of a dwelling-house or real property under a claim of right,

 assaults any person who is lawfully entitled to possession of it and who is entering it peaceably by day to take possession of it, for the purpose of preventing him from entering, the assault shall be deemed to be provoked by the person who is entering.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 42

 Protection of Persons in Authority
 Marginal note: Correction of child by force
 43  Every schoolteacher, parent or person standing in the place of a parent is justified in using force by way of correction toward a pupil or child, as the case may be, who is under his care, if the force does not exceed what is reasonable under the circumstances.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 43

 44   [Repealed, 2001, c. 26, s. 294]
 Marginal note: Surgical operations
 45  Every one is protected from criminal responsibility for performing a surgical operation on any person for the benefit of that person if
 (a)  the operation is performed with reasonable care and skill; and

 (b)  it is reasonable to perform the operation, having regard to the state of health of the person at the time the operation is performed and to all the circumstances of the case.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 45

 PART II Offences Against Public Order
 Treason and other Offences against the Queen’s Authority and Person
 Marginal note: High treason
 46   (1)  Every one commits high treason who, in Canada,
 (a)  kills or attempts to kill Her Majesty, or does her any bodily harm tending to death or destruction, maims or wounds her, or imprisons or restrains her;

 (b)  levies war against Canada or does any act preparatory thereto; or

 (c)  assists an enemy at war with Canada, or any armed forces against whom Canadian Forces are engaged in hostilities, whether or not a state of war exists between Canada and the country whose forces they are.

 Marginal note: Treason
 (2)  Every one commits treason who, in Canada,
 (a)  uses force or violence for the purpose of overthrowing the government of Canada or a province;

 (b)  without lawful authority, communicates or makes available to an agent of a state other than Canada, military or scientific information or any sketch, plan, model, article, note or document of a military or scientific character that he knows or ought to know may be used by that state for a purpose prejudicial to the safety or defence of Canada;

 (c)  conspires with any person to commit high treason or to do anything mentioned in paragraph (a);

 (d)  forms an intention to do anything that is high treason or that is mentioned in paragraph (a) and manifests that intention by an overt act; or

 (e)  conspires with any person to do anything mentioned in paragraph (b) or forms an intention to do anything mentioned in paragraph (b) and manifests that intention by an overt act.

 Marginal note: Canadian citizen
 (3)  Notwithstanding subsection (1) or (2), a Canadian citizen or a person who owes allegiance to Her Majesty in right of Canada,
 (a)  commits high treason if, while in or out of Canada, he does anything mentioned in subsection (1); or

 (b)  commits treason if, while in or out of Canada, he does anything mentioned in subsection (2).

 Marginal note: Overt act
 (4)  Where it is treason to conspire with any person, the act of conspiring is an overt act of treason.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 46
 1974-75-76, c. 105, s. 2

 Marginal note: Punishment for high treason
 47   (1)  Every one who commits high treason is guilty of an indictable offence and shall be sentenced to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Punishment for treason
 (2)  Every one who commits treason is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  to be sentenced to imprisonment for life if he is guilty of an offence under paragraph 46(2)(a), (c) or (d);

 (b)  to be sentenced to imprisonment for life if he is guilty of an offence under paragraph 46(2)(b) or (e) committed while a state of war exists between Canada and another country; or

 (c)  to be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years if he is guilty of an offence under paragraph 46(2)(b) or (e) committed while no state of war exists between Canada and another country.

 Marginal note: Corroboration
 (3)  No person shall be convicted of high treason or treason on the evidence of only one witness, unless the evidence of that witness is corroborated in a material particular by evidence that implicates the accused.

 Marginal note: Minimum punishment
 (4)  For the purposes of Part XXIII, the sentence of imprisonment for life prescribed by subsection (1) is a minimum punishment.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 47
 1974-75-76, c. 105, s. 2

 Marginal note: Limitation
 48   (1)  No proceedings for an offence of treason as defined by paragraph 46(2)(a) shall be commenced more than three years after the time when the offence is alleged to have been committed.

 Marginal note: Information for treasonable words
 (2)  No proceedings shall be commenced under section 47 in respect of an overt act of treason expressed or declared by open and considered speech unless
 (a)  an information setting out the overt act and the words by which it was expressed or declared is laid under oath before a justice within six days after the time when the words are alleged to have been spoken; and

 (b)  a warrant for the arrest of the accused is issued within ten days after the time when the information is laid.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 48
 1974-75-76, c. 105, s. 29

 Prohibited Acts
 Marginal note: Acts intended to alarm Her Majesty or break public peace
 49  Every one who wilfully, in the presence of Her Majesty,
 (a)  does an act with intent to alarm Her Majesty or to break the public peace, or

 (b)  does an act that is intended or is likely to cause bodily harm to Her Majesty,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 49

 Marginal note: Assisting alien enemy to leave Canada, or omitting to prevent treason
 50   (1)  Every one commits an offence who
 (a)  incites or wilfully assists a subject of
 (i)  a state that is at war with Canada, or

 (ii)  a state against whose forces Canadian Forces are engaged in hostilities, whether or not a state of war exists between Canada and the state whose forces they are,

 to leave Canada without the consent of the Crown, unless the accused establishes that assistance to the state referred to in subparagraph (i) or the forces of the state referred to in subparagraph (ii), as the case may be, was not intended thereby; or

 (b)  knowing that a person is about to commit high treason or treason does not, with all reasonable dispatch, inform a justice of the peace or other peace officer thereof or make other reasonable efforts to prevent that person from committing high treason or treason.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 50
 1974-75-76, c. 105, s. 29

 Marginal note: Intimidating Parliament or legislature
 51  Every one who does an act of violence in order to intimidate Parliament or the legislature of a province is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 51

 Marginal note: Sabotage
 52   (1)  Every one who does a prohibited act for a purpose prejudicial to
 (a)  the safety, security or defence of Canada, or

 (b)  the safety or security of the naval, army or air forces of any state other than Canada that are lawfully present in Canada,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Definition of prohibited act
 (2)  In this section, prohibited act means an act or omission that
 (a)  impairs the efficiency or impedes the working of any vessel, vehicle, aircraft, machinery, apparatus or other thing; or

 (b)  causes property, by whomever it may be owned, to be lost, damaged or destroyed.

 Marginal note: Saving
 (3)  No person does a prohibited act within the meaning of this section by reason only that
 (a)  he stops work as a result of the failure of his employer and himself to agree on any matter relating to his employment;

 (b)  he stops work as a result of the failure of his employer and a bargaining agent acting on his behalf to agree on any matter relating to his employment; or

 (c)  he stops work as a result of his taking part in a combination of workmen or employees for their own reasonable protection as workmen or employees.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (4)  No person does a prohibited act within the meaning of this section by reason only that he attends at or near or approaches a dwelling-house or place for the purpose only of obtaining or communicating information.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 52

 Marginal note: Inciting to mutiny
 53  Every one who
 (a)  attempts, for a traitorous or mutinous purpose, to seduce a member of the Canadian Forces from his duty and allegiance to Her Majesty, or

 (b)  attempts to incite or to induce a member of the Canadian Forces to commit a traitorous or mutinous act,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 53

 Marginal note: Assisting deserter
 54  Every one who aids, assists, harbours or conceals a person who he knows is a deserter or absentee without leave from the Canadian Forces is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction, but no proceedings shall be instituted under this section without the consent of the Attorney General of Canada.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 54

 Marginal note: Evidence of overt acts
 55  In proceedings for an offence against any provision in section 47 or sections 49 to 53, no evidence is admissible of an overt act unless that overt act is set out in the indictment or unless the evidence is otherwise relevant as tending to prove an overt act that is set out therein.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 55

 Marginal note: Offences in relation to members of R.C.M.P.
 56  Every one who wilfully
 (a)  persuades or counsels a member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to desert or absent himself without leave,

 (b)  aids, assists, harbours or conceals a member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police who he knows is a deserter or absentee without leave, or

 (c)  aids or assists a member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to desert or absent himself without leave, knowing that the member is about to desert or absent himself without leave,

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 56
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 8

 Passports
 Marginal note: Forgery of or uttering forged passport
 57   (1)  Every one who, while in or out of Canada,
 (a)  forges a passport, or

 (b)  knowing that a passport is forged
 (i)  uses, deals with or acts on it, or

 (ii)  causes or attempts to cause any person to use, deal with or act on it, as if the passport were genuine,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 Marginal note: False statement in relation to passport
 (2)  Every one who, while in or out of Canada, for the purpose of procuring a passport for himself or any other person or for the purpose of procuring any material alteration or addition to any such passport, makes a written or an oral statement that he knows is false or misleading
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Possession of forged, etc., passport
 (3)  Every one who without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him, has in his possession a forged passport or a passport in respect of which an offence under subsection (2) has been committed is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Special provisions applicable
 (4)  For the purposes of proceedings under this section,
 (a)  the place where a passport was forged is not material; and

 (b)  the definition false document in section 321, and section 366, apply with such modifications as the circumstances require.

 Definition of passport
 (5)  In this section, passport means a document issued by or under the authority of the Minister of Foreign Affairs for the purpose of identifying the holder thereof.

 Marginal note: Jurisdiction
 (6)  Where a person is alleged to have committed, while out of Canada, an offence under this section, proceedings in respect of that offence may, whether or not that person is in Canada, be commenced in any territorial division in Canada and the accused may be tried and punished in respect of that offence in the same manner as if the offence had been committed in that territorial division.

 Marginal note: Appearance of accused at trial
 (7)  For greater certainty, the provisions of this Act relating to
 (a)  requirements that an accused appear at and be present during proceedings, and

 (b)  the exceptions to those requirements,

 apply to proceedings commenced in any territorial division pursuant to subsection (6).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 57
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 9
 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F)
 1994, c. 44, s. 4
 1995, c. 5, s. 25

 Marginal note: Fraudulent use of certificate of citizenship
 58   (1)  Every one who, while in or out of Canada,
 (a)  uses a certificate of citizenship or a certificate of naturalization for a fraudulent purpose, or

 (b)  being a person to whom a certificate of citizenship or a certificate of naturalization has been granted, knowingly parts with the possession of that certificate with intent that it should be used for a fraudulent purpose,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Definition of certificate of citizenship and certificate of naturalization
 (2)  In this section, certificate of citizenship and certificate of naturalization , respectively, mean a certificate of citizenship and a certificate of naturalization as defined by the Citizenship Act .

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 59
 1974-75-76, c. 108, s. 41

 Sedition
 Marginal note: Seditious words
 59   (1)  Seditious words are words that express a seditious intention.

 Marginal note: Seditious libel
 (2)  A seditious libel is a libel that expresses a seditious intention.

 Marginal note: Seditious conspiracy
 (3)  A seditious conspiracy is an agreement between two or more persons to carry out a seditious intention.

 Marginal note: Seditious intention
 (4)  Without limiting the generality of the meaning of the expression seditious intention , every one shall be presumed to have a seditious intention who
 (a)  teaches or advocates, or

 (b)  publishes or circulates any writing that advocates,

 the use, without the authority of law, of force as a means of accomplishing a governmental change within Canada.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 60

 Marginal note: Exception
 60  Notwithstanding subsection 59(4), no person shall be deemed to have a seditious intention by reason only that he intends, in good faith,
 (a)  to show that Her Majesty has been misled or mistaken in her measures;

 (b)  to point out errors or defects in
 (i)  the government or constitution of Canada or a province,

 (ii)  Parliament or the legislature of a province, or

 (iii)  the administration of justice in Canada;

 (c)  to procure, by lawful means, the alteration of any matter of government in Canada; or

 (d)  to point out, for the purpose of removal, matters that produce or tend to produce feelings of hostility and ill-will between different classes of persons in Canada.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 61

 Marginal note: Punishment of seditious offences
 61  Every one who
 (a)  speaks seditious words,

 (b)  publishes a seditious libel, or

 (c)  is a party to a seditious conspiracy,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 62

 Marginal note: Offences in relation to military forces
 62   (1)  Every one who wilfully
 (a)  interferes with, impairs or influences the loyalty or discipline of a member of a force,

 (b)  publishes, edits, issues, circulates or distributes a writing that advises, counsels or urges insubordination, disloyalty, mutiny or refusal of duty by a member of a force, or

 (c)  advises, counsels, urges or in any manner causes insubordination, disloyalty, mutiny or refusal of duty by a member of a force,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Definition of member of a force
 (2)  In this section, member of a force means a member of
 (a)  the Canadian Forces; or

 (b)  the naval, army or air forces of a state other than Canada that are lawfully present in Canada.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 63

 Unlawful Assemblies and Riots
 Marginal note: Unlawful assembly
 63   (1)  An unlawful assembly is an assembly of three or more persons who, with intent to carry out any common purpose, assemble in such a manner or so conduct themselves when they are assembled as to cause persons in the neighbourhood of the assembly to fear, on reasonable grounds, that they
 (a)  will disturb the peace tumultuously; or

 (b)  will by that assembly needlessly and without reasonable cause provoke other persons to disturb the peace tumultuously.

 Marginal note: Lawful assembly becoming unlawful
 (2)  Persons who are lawfully assembled may become an unlawful assembly if they conduct themselves with a common purpose in a manner that would have made the assembly unlawful if they had assembled in that manner for that purpose.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (3)  Persons are not unlawfully assembled by reason only that they are assembled to protect the dwelling-house of any one of them against persons who are threatening to break and enter it for the purpose of committing an indictable offence therein.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 64

 Marginal note: Riot
 64  A riot is an unlawful assembly that has begun to disturb the peace tumultuously.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 65

 Marginal note: Punishment of rioter
 65  Every one who takes part in a riot is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 66

 Marginal note: Punishment for unlawful assembly
 66  Every one who is a member of an unlawful assembly is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 67

 Marginal note: Reading proclamation
 67  A person who is
 (a)  a justice, mayor or sheriff, or the lawful deputy of a mayor or sheriff,

 (b)  a warden or deputy warden of a prison, or

 (c)  the institutional head of a penitentiary, as those expressions are defined in subsection 2(1) of the Corrections and Conditional Release Act , or that person’s deputy,

 who receives notice that, at any place within the jurisdiction of the person, twelve or more persons are unlawfully and riotously assembled together shall go to that place and, after approaching as near as is safe, if the person is satisfied that a riot is in progress, shall command silence and thereupon make or cause to be made in a loud voice a proclamation in the following words or to the like effect:
 Her Majesty the Queen charges and commands all persons being assembled immediately to disperse and peaceably to depart to their habitations or to their lawful business on the pain of being guilty of an offence for which, on conviction, they may be sentenced to imprisonment for life. GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 67
 1994, c. 44, s. 5

 Marginal note: Offences related to proclamation
 68  Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life who
 (a)  opposes, hinders or assaults, wilfully and with force, a person who begins to make or is about to begin to make or is making the proclamation referred to in section 67 so that it is not made;

 (b)  does not peaceably disperse and depart from a place where the proclamation referred to in section 67 is made within thirty minutes after it is made; or

 (c)  does not depart from a place within thirty minutes when he has reasonable grounds to believe that the proclamation referred to in section 67 would have been made in that place if some person had not opposed, hindered or assaulted, wilfully and with force, a person who would have made it.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 69

 Marginal note: Neglect by peace officer
 69  A peace officer who receives notice that there is a riot within his jurisdiction and, without reasonable excuse, fails to take all reasonable steps to suppress the riot is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 70

 Unlawful Drilling
 Marginal note: Orders by Governor in Council
 70   (1)  The Governor in Council may, by proclamation, make orders
 (a)  to prohibit assemblies, without lawful authority, of persons for the purpose
 (i)  of training or drilling themselves,

 (ii)  of being trained or drilled to the use of arms, or

 (iii)  of practising military exercises; or

 (b)  to prohibit persons when assembled for any purpose from training or drilling themselves or from being trained or drilled.

 Marginal note: General or special order
 (2)  An order that is made under subsection (1) may be general or may be made applicable to particular places, districts or assemblies to be specified in the order.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  Every one who contravenes an order made under this section is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 70
 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F)

 Duels
 Marginal note: Duelling
 71  Every one who
 (a)  challenges or attempts by any means to provoke another person to fight a duel,

 (b)  attempts to provoke a person to challenge another person to fight a duel, or

 (c)  accepts a challenge to fight a duel,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 72

 Forcible Entry and Detainer
 Marginal note: Forcible entry
 72   (1)  A person commits forcible entry when that person enters real property that is in the actual and peaceable possession of another in a manner that is likely to cause a breach of the peace or reasonable apprehension of a breach of the peace.

 Marginal note: Matters not material
 (1.1)  For the purposes of subsection (1), it is immaterial whether or not a person is entitled to enter the real property or whether or not that person has any intention of taking possession of the real property.

 Marginal note: Forcible detainer
 (2)  A person commits forcible detainer when, being in actual possession of real property without colour of right, he detains it in a manner that is likely to cause a breach of the peace or reasonable apprehension of a breach of the peace, against a person who is entitled by law to possession of it.

 Marginal note: Questions of law
 (3)  The questions whether a person is in actual and peaceable possession or is in actual possession without colour of right are questions of law.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 72
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 10
 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F)

 Marginal note: Punishment
 73  Every person who commits forcible entry or forcible detainer is guilty of
 (a)  an offence punishable on summary conviction; or

 (b)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 73
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 11
 1992, c. 1, s. 58

 Piracy
 Marginal note: Piracy by law of nations
 74   (1)  Every one commits piracy who does any act that, by the law of nations, is piracy.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits piracy while in or out of Canada is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 75
 1974-75-76, c. 105, s. 3

 Marginal note: Piratical acts
 75  Every one who, while in or out of Canada,
 (a)  steals a Canadian ship,

 (b)  steals or without lawful authority throws overboard, damages or destroys anything that is part of the cargo, supplies or fittings in a Canadian ship,

 (c)  does or attempts to do a mutinous act on a Canadian ship, or

 (d)  counsels a person to do anything mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) or (c),

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 75
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 7

 Offences against Air or Maritime Safety
 Marginal note: Hijacking
 76  Every one who, unlawfully, by force or threat thereof, or by any other form of intimidation, seizes or exercises control of an aircraft with intent
 (a)  to cause any person on board the aircraft to be confined or imprisoned against his will,

 (b)  to cause any person on board the aircraft to be transported against his will to any place other than the next scheduled place of landing of the aircraft,

 (c)  to hold any person on board the aircraft for ransom or to service against his will, or

 (d)  to cause the aircraft to deviate in a material respect from its flight plan,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.
 1972, c. 13, s. 6

 Marginal note: Endangering safety of aircraft or airport
 77  Every one who
 (a)  on board an aircraft in flight, commits an act of violence against a person that is likely to endanger the safety of the aircraft,

 (b)  using a weapon, commits an act of violence against a person at an airport serving international civil aviation that causes or is likely to cause serious injury or death and that endangers or is likely to endanger safety at the airport,

 (c)  causes damage to an aircraft in service that renders the aircraft incapable of flight or that is likely to endanger the safety of the aircraft in flight,

 (d)  places or causes to be placed on board an aircraft in service anything that is likely to cause damage to the aircraft, that will render it incapable of flight or that is likely to endanger the safety of the aircraft in flight,

 (e)  causes damage to or interferes with the operation of any air navigation facility where the damage or interference is likely to endanger the safety of an aircraft in flight,

 (f)  using a weapon, substance or device, destroys or causes serious damage to the facilities of an airport serving international civil aviation or to any aircraft not in service located there, or causes disruption of services of the airport, that endangers or is likely to endanger safety at the airport, or

 (g)  endangers the safety of an aircraft in flight by communicating to any other person any information that the person knows to be false,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 77
 1993, c. 7, s. 3

 Marginal note: Offensive weapons and explosive substances
 78   (1)  Every one, other than a peace officer engaged in the execution of his duty, who takes on board a civil aircraft an offensive weapon or any explosive substance
 (a)  without the consent of the owner or operator of the aircraft or of a person duly authorized by either of them to consent thereto, or

 (b)  with the consent referred to in paragraph (a) but without complying with all terms and conditions on which the consent was given,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 Definition of civil aircraft
 (2)  For the purposes of this section, civil aircraft means all aircraft other than aircraft operated by the Canadian Forces, a police force in Canada or persons engaged in the administration or enforcement of the Customs Act , the Excise Act or the Excise Act, 2001 .

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 78
 R.S., 1985, c. 1 (2nd Supp.), s. 213
 2002, c. 22, s. 325

 Marginal note: Seizing control of ship or fixed platform
 78.1   (1)  Every one who seizes or exercises control over a ship or fixed platform by force or threat of force or by any other form of intimidation is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Endangering safety of ship or fixed platform
 (2)  Every one who
 (a)  commits an act of violence against a person on board a ship or fixed platform,

 (b)  destroys or causes damage to a ship or its cargo or to a fixed platform,

 (c)  destroys or causes serious damage to or interferes with the operation of any maritime navigational facility, or

 (d)  places or causes to be placed on board a ship or fixed platform anything that is likely to cause damage to the ship or its cargo or to the fixed platform,

 where that act is likely to endanger the safe navigation of a ship or the safety of a fixed platform, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: False communication
 (3)  Every one who communicates information that endangers the safe navigation of a ship, knowing the information to be false, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Threats causing death or injury
 (4)  Every one who threatens to commit an offence under paragraph (2)(a), (b) or (c) in order to compel a person to do or refrain from doing any act, where the threat is likely to endanger the safe navigation of a ship or the safety of a fixed platform, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Definitions
 (5)  In this section,
 fixed platform fixed platform  means an artificial island or a marine installation or structure that is permanently attached to the seabed for the purpose of exploration or exploitation of resources or for other economic purposes; ( plate-forme fixe )
 ship ship  means every description of vessel not permanently attached to the seabed, other than a warship, a ship being used as a naval auxiliary or for customs or police purposes or a ship that has been withdrawn from navigation or is laid up. ( navire )

 1993, c. 7, s. 4

 Dangerous Substances
 Marginal note: Duty of care re explosive
 79  Every one who has an explosive substance in his possession or under his care or control is under a legal duty to use reasonable care to prevent bodily harm or death to persons or damage to property by that explosive substance.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 77

 Marginal note: Breach of duty
 80  Every one who, being under a legal duty within the meaning of section 79, fails without lawful excuse to perform that duty, is guilty of an indictable offence and, if as a result an explosion of an explosive substance occurs that
 (a)  causes death or is likely to cause death to any person, is liable to imprisonment for life; or

 (b)  causes bodily harm or damage to property or is likely to cause bodily harm or damage to property, is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 78

 Marginal note: Using explosives
 81   (1)  Every one commits an offence who
 (a)  does anything with intent to cause an explosion of an explosive substance that is likely to cause serious bodily harm or death to persons or is likely to cause serious damage to property;

 (b)  with intent to do bodily harm to any person
 (i)  causes an explosive substance to explode,

 (ii)  sends or delivers to a person or causes a person to take or receive an explosive substance or any other dangerous substance or thing, or

 (iii)  places or throws anywhere or at or on a person a corrosive fluid, explosive substance or any other dangerous substance or thing;

 (c)  with intent to destroy or damage property without lawful excuse, places or throws an explosive substance anywhere; or

 (d)  makes or has in his possession or has under his care or control any explosive substance with intent thereby
 (i)  to endanger life or to cause serious damage to property, or

 (ii)  to enable another person to endanger life or to cause serious damage to property.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  for an offence under paragraph (1)(a) or (b), to imprisonment for life; or

 (b)  for an offence under paragraph (1)(c) or (d), to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 79

 Marginal note: Possession without lawful excuse
 82   (1)  Every person who, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on the person, makes or has in the possession or under the care or control of the person any explosive substance is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Possession in association with criminal organization
 (2)  Every person who, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on the person, makes or has in the possession or under the care or control of the person any explosive substance for the benefit of, at the direction of or in association with a criminal organization is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 82
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 12
 1997, c. 23, s. 2
 2001, c. 32, s. 3(F)

 Marginal note: Sentences to be served consecutively
 82.1  A sentence imposed on a person for an offence under subsection 82(2) shall be served consecutively to any other punishment imposed on the person for an offence arising out of the same event or series of events and to any other sentence to which the person is subject at the time the sentence is imposed on the person for an offence under subsection 82(2).
 1997, c. 23, s. 2

 Prize Fights
 Marginal note: Engaging in prize fight
 83   (1)  Every one who
 (a)  engages as a principal in a prize fight,

 (b)  advises, encourages or promotes a prize fight, or

 (c)  is present at a prize fight as an aid, second, surgeon, umpire, backer or reporter,

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Definition of prize fight
 (2)  In this section, prize fight means an encounter or fight with fists or hands between two persons who have met for that purpose by previous arrangement made by or for them, but a boxing contest between amateur sportsmen, where the contestants wear boxing gloves of not less than one hundred and forty grams each in mass, or any boxing contest held with the permission or under the authority of an athletic board or commission or similar body established by or under the authority of the legislature of a province for the control of sport within the province, shall be deemed not to be a prize fight.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 83
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 186

 PART II.1 Terrorism
 Interpretation
 Marginal note: Definitions
 83.01   (1)  The following definitions apply in this Part.
 Canadian
 Canadien
 Canadian means a Canadian citizen, a permanent resident within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act or a body corporate incorporated and continued under the laws of Canada or a province. ( Canadien )
 entity
 entité
 entity means a person, group, trust, partnership or fund or an unincorporated association or organization. ( entité )
 listed entity
 entité inscrite
 listed entity means an entity on a list established by the Governor in Council under section 83.05. ( entité inscrite )
 terrorist activity
 activité terroriste
 terrorist activity means
 (a)  an act or omission that is committed in or outside Canada and that, if committed in Canada, is one of the following offences:
 (i)  the offences referred to in subsection 7(2) that implement the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft , signed at The Hague on December 16, 1970,

 (ii)  the offences referred to in subsection 7(2) that implement the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation , signed at Montreal on September 23, 1971,

 (iii)  the offences referred to in subsection 7(3) that implement the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents , adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 14, 1973,

 (iv)  the offences referred to in subsection 7(3.1) that implement the International Convention against the Taking of Hostages , adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 17, 1979,

 (v)  the offences referred to in subsection 7(3.4) or (3.6) that implement the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material , done at Vienna and New York on March 3, 1980,

 (vi)  the offences referred to in subsection 7(2) that implement the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation , supplementary to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation , signed at Montreal on February 24, 1988,

 (vii)  the offences referred to in subsection 7(2.1) that implement the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation , done at Rome on March 10, 1988,

 (viii)  the offences referred to in subsection 7(2.1) or (2.2) that implement the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf , done at Rome on March 10, 1988,

 (ix)  the offences referred to in subsection 7(3.72) that implement the International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings , adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 15, 1997, and

 (x)  the offences referred to in subsection 7(3.73) that implement the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism , adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1999, or

 (b)  an act or omission, in or outside Canada,
 (i)  that is committed
 (A)  in whole or in part for a political, religious or ideological purpose, objective or cause, and

 (B)  in whole or in part with the intention of intimidating the public, or a segment of the public, with regard to its security, including its economic security, or compelling a person, a government or a domestic or an international organization to do or to refrain from doing any act, whether the public or the person, government or organization is inside or outside Canada, and

 (ii)  that intentionally
 (A)  causes death or serious bodily harm to a person by the use of violence,

 (B)  endangers a person’s life,

 (C)  causes a serious risk to the health or safety of the public or any segment of the public,

 (D)  causes substantial property damage, whether to public or private property, if causing such damage is likely to result in the conduct or harm referred to in any of clauses (A) to (C), or

 (E)  causes serious interference with or serious disruption of an essential service, facility or system, whether public or private, other than as a result of advocacy, protest, dissent or stoppage of work that is not intended to result in the conduct or harm referred to in any of clauses (A) to (C),

 and includes a conspiracy, attempt or threat to commit any such act or omission, or being an accessory after the fact or counselling in relation to any such act or omission, but, for greater certainty, does not include an act or omission that is committed during an armed conflict and that, at the time and in the place of its commission, is in accordance with customary international law or conventional international law applicable to the conflict, or the activities undertaken by military forces of a state in the exercise of their official duties, to the extent that those activities are governed by other rules of international law. ( activité terroriste )
 terrorist group
 groupe terroriste
 terrorist group means
 (a)  an entity that has as one of its purposes or activities facilitating or carrying out any terrorist activity, or

 (b)  a listed entity,

 and includes an association of such entities. ( groupe terroriste )

 Marginal note: For greater certainty
 (1.1)  For greater certainty, the expression of a political, religious or ideological thought, belief or opinion does not come within paragraph (b) of the definition terrorist activity in subsection (1) unless it constitutes an act or omission that satisfies the criteria of that paragraph.

 Marginal note: Facilitation
 (2)  For the purposes of this Part, facilitation shall be construed in accordance with subsection 83.19(2).

 2001, c. 41, ss. 4, 126

 Financing of Terrorism
 Marginal note: Providing or collecting property for certain activities
 83.02  Every one who, directly or indirectly, wilfully and without lawful justification or excuse, provides or collects property intending that it be used or knowing that it will be used, in whole or in part, in order to carry out
 (a)  an act or omission that constitutes an offence referred to in subparagraphs (a)(i) to (ix) of the definition of terrorist activity in subsection 83.01(1), or

 (b)  any other act or omission intended to cause death or serious bodily harm to a civilian or to any other person not taking an active part in the hostilities in a situation of armed conflict, if the purpose of that act or omission, by its nature or context, is to intimidate the public, or to compel a government or an international organization to do or refrain from doing any act,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 10 years.
 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Providing, making available, etc., property or services for terrorist purposes
 83.03  Every one who, directly or indirectly, collects property, provides or invites a person to provide, or makes available property or financial or other related services
 (a)  intending that they be used, or knowing that they will be used, in whole or in part, for the purpose of facilitating or carrying out any terrorist activity, or for the purpose of benefiting any person who is facilitating or carrying out such an activity, or

 (b)  knowing that, in whole or part, they will be used by or will benefit a terrorist group,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 10 years.
 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Using or possessing property for terrorist purposes
 83.04  Every one who
 (a)  uses property, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, for the purpose of facilitating or carrying out a terrorist activity, or

 (b)  possesses property intending that it be used or knowing that it will be used, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, for the purpose of facilitating or carrying out a terrorist activity,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than 10 years.
 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 List of Entities
 Marginal note: Establishment of list
 83.05   (1)  The Governor in Council may, by regulation, establish a list on which the Governor in Council may place any entity if, on the recommendation of the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, the Governor in Council is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
 (a)  the entity has knowingly carried out, attempted to carry out, participated in or facilitated a terrorist activity; or

 (b)  the entity is knowingly acting on behalf of, at the direction of or in association with an entity referred to in paragraph (a).

 Marginal note: Recommendation
 (1.1)  The Minister may make a recommendation referred to in subsection (1) only if he or she has reasonable grounds to believe that the entity to which the recommendation relates is an entity referred to in paragraph (1)(a) or (b).

 Marginal note: Application to Minister
 (2)  On application in writing by a listed entity, the Minister shall decide whether there are reasonable grounds to recommend to the Governor in Council that the applicant no longer be a listed entity.

 Marginal note: Deeming
 (3)  If the Minister does not make a decision on the application referred to in subsection (2) within 60 days after receipt of the application, he or she is deemed to have decided to recommend that the applicant remain a listed entity.

 Marginal note: Notice of the decision to the applicant
 (4)  The Minister shall give notice without delay to the applicant of any decision taken or deemed to have been taken respecting the application referred to in subsection (2).

 Marginal note: Judicial review
 (5)  Within 60 days after the receipt of the notice of the decision referred to in subsection (4), the applicant may apply to a judge for judicial review of the decision.

 Marginal note: Reference
 (6)  When an application is made under subsection (5), the judge shall, without delay
 (a)  examine, in private, any security or criminal intelligence reports considered in listing the applicant and hear any other evidence or information that may be presented by or on behalf of the Minister and may, at his or her request, hear all or part of that evidence or information in the absence of the applicant and any counsel representing the applicant, if the judge is of the opinion that the disclosure of the information would injure national security or endanger the safety of any person;

 (b)  provide the applicant with a statement summarizing the information available to the judge so as to enable the applicant to be reasonably informed of the reasons for the decision, without disclosing any information the disclosure of which would, in the judge’s opinion, injure national security or endanger the safety of any person;

 (c)  provide the applicant with a reasonable opportunity to be heard; and

 (d)  determine whether the decision is reasonable on the basis of the information available to the judge and, if found not to be reasonable, order that the applicant no longer be a listed entity.

 Marginal note: Evidence
 (6.1)  The judge may receive into evidence anything that, in the opinion of the judge, is reliable and appropriate, even if it would not otherwise be admissible under Canadian law, and may base his or her decision on that evidence.

 Marginal note: Publication
 (7)  The Minister shall cause to be published, without delay, in the Canada Gazette notice of a final order of a court that the applicant no longer be a listed entity.

 Marginal note: New application
 (8)  A listed entity may not make another application under subsection (2), except if there has been a material change in its circumstances since the time when the entity made its last application or if the Minister has completed the review under subsection (9).

 Marginal note: Review of list
 (9)  Two years after the establishment of the list referred to in subsection (1), and every two years after that, the Minister shall review the list to determine whether there are still reasonable grounds, as set out in subsection (1), for an entity to be a listed entity and make a recommendation to the Governor in Council as to whether the entity should remain a listed entity. The review does not affect the validity of the list.

 Marginal note: Completion of review
 (10)  The Minister shall complete the review as soon as possible and in any event, no later than 120 days after its commencement. After completing the review, he or she shall cause to be published, without delay, in the Canada Gazette notice that the review has been completed.

 Definition of judge
 (11)  In this section, judge means the Chief Justice of the Federal Court or a judge of that Court designated by the Chief Justice.

 2001, c. 41, ss. 4, 143
 2005, c. 10, ss. 18, 34

 Marginal note: Admission of foreign information obtained in confidence
 83.06   (1)  For the purposes of subsection 83.05(6), in private and in the absence of the applicant or any counsel representing it,
 (a)  the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness may make an application to the judge for the admission of information obtained in confidence from a government, an institution or an agency of a foreign state, from an international organization of states or from an institution or an agency of an international organization of states; and

 (b)  the judge shall examine the information and provide counsel representing the Minister with a reasonable opportunity to be heard as to whether the information is relevant but should not be disclosed to the applicant or any counsel representing it because the disclosure would injure national security or endanger the safety of any person.

 Marginal note: Return of information
 (2)  The information shall be returned to counsel representing the Minister and shall not be considered by the judge in making the determination under paragraph 83.05(6)(d), if
 (a)  the judge determines that the information is not relevant;

 (b)  the judge determines that the information is relevant but should be summarized in the statement to be provided under paragraph 83.05(6)(b); or

 (c)  the Minister withdraws the application.

 Marginal note: Use of information
 (3)  If the judge decides that the information is relevant but that its disclosure would injure national security or endanger the safety of persons, the information shall not be disclosed in the statement mentioned in paragraph 83.05(6)(b), but the judge may base the determination under paragraph 83.05(6)(d) on it.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4
 2005, c. 10, s. 19

 Marginal note: Mistaken identity
 83.07   (1)  An entity claiming not to be a listed entity may apply to the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness for a certificate stating that it is not a listed entity.

 Marginal note: Issuance of certificate
 (2)  The Minister shall, within 15 days after receiving the application, issue a certificate if he or she is satisfied that the applicant is not a listed entity.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4
 2005, c. 10, s. 20

 Freezing of Property
 Marginal note: Freezing of property
 83.08   (1)  No person in Canada and no Canadian outside Canada shall knowingly
 (a)  deal directly or indirectly in any property that is owned or controlled by or on behalf of a terrorist group;

 (b)  enter into or facilitate, directly or indirectly, any transaction in respect of property referred to in paragraph (a); or

 (c)  provide any financial or other related services in respect of property referred to in paragraph (a) to, for the benefit of or at the direction of a terrorist group.

 Marginal note: No civil liability
 (2)  A person who acts reasonably in taking, or omitting to take, measures to comply with subsection (1) shall not be liable in any civil action arising from having taken or omitted to take the measures, if the person took all reasonable steps to satisfy themself that the relevant property was owned or controlled by or on behalf of a terrorist group.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Exemptions
 83.09   (1)  The Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, or a person designated by him or her, may authorize any person in Canada or any Canadian outside Canada to carry out a specified activity or transaction that is prohibited by section 83.08, or a class of such activities or transactions.

 Marginal note: Ministerial authorization
 (2)  The Minister, or a person designated by him or her, may make the authorization subject to any terms and conditions that are required in their opinion and may amend, suspend, revoke or reinstate it.

 Marginal note: Existing equities maintained
 (3)  All secured and unsecured rights and interests in the frozen property that are held by persons, other than terrorist groups or their agents, are entitled to the same ranking that they would have been entitled to had the property not been frozen.

 Marginal note: Third party involvement
 (4)  If a person has obtained an authorization under subsection (1), any other person involved in carrying out the activity or transaction, or class of activities or transactions, to which the authorization relates is not subject to sections 83.08, 83.1 and 83.11 if the terms or conditions of the authorization that are imposed under subsection (2), if any, are met.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4
 2005, c. 10, s. 21

 Marginal note: Disclosure
 83.1   (1)  Every person in Canada and every Canadian outside Canada shall disclose forthwith to the Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and to the Director of the Canadian Security Intelligence Service
 (a)  the existence of property in their possession or control that they know is owned or controlled by or on behalf of a terrorist group; and

 (b)  information about a transaction or proposed transaction in respect of property referred to in paragraph (a).

 Marginal note: Immunity
 (2)  No criminal or civil proceedings lie against a person for disclosure made in good faith under subsection (1).

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Audit
 83.11   (1)  The following entities must determine on a continuing basis whether they are in possession or control of property owned or controlled by or on behalf of a listed entity:
 (a)  authorized foreign banks within the meaning of section 2 of the Bank Act in respect of their business in Canada, or banks to which that Act applies;

 (b)  cooperative credit societies, savings and credit unions and caisses populaires regulated by a provincial Act and associations regulated by the Cooperative Credit Associations Act ;

 (c)  foreign companies within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Insurance Companies Act in respect of their insurance business in Canada;

 (c.1)  companies, provincial companies and societies within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Insurance Companies Act ;

 (c.2)  fraternal benefit societies regulated by a provincial Act in respect of their insurance activities, and insurance companies and other entities engaged in the business of insuring risks that are regulated by a provincial Act;

 (d)  companies to which the Trust and Loan Companies Act applies;

 (e)  trust companies regulated by a provincial Act;

 (f)  loan companies regulated by a provincial Act; and

 (g)  entities authorized under provincial legislation to engage in the business of dealing in securities, or to provide portfolio management or investment counselling services.

 Marginal note: Monthly report
 (2)  Subject to the regulations, every entity referred to in paragraphs (1)(a) to (g) must report, within the period specified by regulation or, if no period is specified, monthly, to the principal agency or body that supervises or regulates it under federal or provincial law either
 (a)  that it is not in possession or control of any property referred to in subsection (1), or

 (b)  that it is in possession or control of such property, in which case it must also report the number of persons, contracts or accounts involved and the total value of the property.

 Marginal note: Immunity
 (3)  No criminal or civil proceedings lie against a person for making a report in good faith under subsection (2).

 Marginal note: Regulations
 (4)  The Governor in Council may make regulations
 (a)  excluding any entity or class of entities from the requirement to make a report referred to in subsection (2), and specifying the conditions of exclusion; and

 (b)  specifying a period for the purposes of subsection (2).

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Offences — freezing of property, disclosure or audit
 83.12   (1)  Every one who contravenes any of sections 83.08, 83.1 and 83.11 is guilty of an offence and liable
 (a)  on summary conviction, to a fine of not more than $100,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than one year, or to both; or

 (b)  on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term of not more than 10 years.

 Marginal note: No contravention
 (2)  No person contravenes section 83.1 if they make the disclosure referred to in that section only to the Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police or the Director of the Canadian Security Intelligence Service.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Seizure and Restraint of Property
 Marginal note: Seizure and restraint of assets
 83.13   (1)  Where a judge of the Federal Court, on an ex parte application by the Attorney General, after examining the application in private, is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there is in any building, receptacle or place any property in respect of which an order of forfeiture may be made under subsection 83.14(5), the judge may issue
 (a)  if the property is situated in Canada, a warrant authorizing a person named therein or a peace officer to search the building, receptacle or place for that property and to seize that property and any other property in respect of which that person or peace officer believes, on reasonable grounds, that an order of forfeiture may be made under that subsection; or

 (b)  if the property is situated in or outside Canada, a restraint order prohibiting any person from disposing of, or otherwise dealing with any interest in, that property other than as may be specified in the order.

 Marginal note: Contents of application
 (1.1)  An affidavit in support of an application under subsection (1) may be sworn on information and belief, and, notwithstanding the Federal Court Rules, 1998 , no adverse inference shall be drawn from a failure to provide evidence of persons having personal knowledge of material facts.

 Marginal note: Appointment of manager
 (2)  On an application under subsection (1), at the request of the Attorney General, if a judge is of the opinion that the circumstances so require, the judge may
 (a)  appoint a person to take control of, and to manage or otherwise deal with, all or part of the property in accordance with the directions of the judge; and

 (b)  require any person having possession of that property to give possession of the property to the person appointed under paragraph (a).

 Marginal note: Appointment of Minister of Public Works and Government Services
 (3)  When the Attorney General of Canada so requests, a judge appointing a person under subsection (2) shall appoint the Minister of Public Works and Government Services.

 Marginal note: Power to manage
 (4)  The power to manage or otherwise deal with property under subsection (2) includes
 (a)  in the case of perishable or rapidly depreciating property, the power to sell that property; and

 (b)  in the case of property that has little or no value, the power to destroy that property.

 Marginal note: Application for destruction order
 (5)  Before a person appointed under subsection (2) destroys property referred to in paragraph (4)(b), he or she shall apply to a judge of the Federal Court for a destruction order.

 Marginal note: Notice
 (6)  Before making a destruction order in relation to any property, a judge shall require notice in accordance with subsection (7) to be given to, and may hear, any person who, in the opinion of the judge, appears to have a valid interest in the property.

 Marginal note: Manner of giving notice
 (7)  A notice under subsection (6) shall be given in the manner that the judge directs or as provided in the rules of the Federal Court.

 Marginal note: Order
 (8)  A judge may order that property be destroyed if he or she is satisfied that the property has little or no financial or other value.

 Marginal note: When management order ceases to have effect
 (9)  A management order ceases to have effect when the property that is the subject of the management order is returned to an applicant in accordance with the law or forfeited to Her Majesty.

 Marginal note: Application to vary
 (10)  The Attorney General may at any time apply to a judge of the Federal Court to cancel or vary an order or warrant made under this section, other than an appointment made under subsection (3).

 Marginal note: Procedure
 (11)  Subsections 462.32(4) and (6), sections 462.34 to 462.35 and 462.4, subsections 487(3) and (4) and section 488 apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to a warrant issued under paragraph (1)(a).

 Marginal note: Procedure
 (12)  Subsections 462.33(4) and (6) to (11) and sections 462.34 to 462.35 and 462.4 apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to an order issued under paragraph (1)(b).

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Forfeiture of Property
 Marginal note: Application for order of forfeiture
 83.14   (1)  The Attorney General may make an application to a judge of the Federal Court for an order of forfeiture in respect of
 (a)  property owned or controlled by or on behalf of a terrorist group; or

 (b)  property that has been or will be used, in whole or in part, to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity.

 Marginal note: Contents of application
 (2)  An affidavit in support of an application by the Attorney General under subsection (1) may be sworn on information and belief, and, notwithstanding the Federal Court Rules, 1998 , no adverse inference shall be drawn from a failure to provide evidence of persons having personal knowledge of material facts.

 Marginal note: Respondents
 (3)  The Attorney General is required to name as a respondent to an application under subsection (1) only those persons who are known to own or control the property that is the subject of the application.

 Marginal note: Notice
 (4)  The Attorney General shall give notice of an application under subsection (1) to named respondents in such a manner as the judge directs or as provided in the rules of the Federal Court.

 Marginal note: Granting of forfeiture order
 (5)  If a judge is satisfied on a balance of probabilities that property is property referred to in paragraph (1)(a) or (b), the judge shall order that the property be forfeited to Her Majesty to be disposed of as the Attorney General directs or otherwise dealt with in accordance with the law.

 Marginal note: Use of proceeds
 (5.1)  Any proceeds that arise from the disposal of property under subsection (5) may be used to compensate victims of terrorist activities and to fund anti-terrorist initiatives in accordance with any regulations made by the Governor in Council under subsection (5.2).

 Marginal note: Regulations
 (5.2)  The Governor in Council may make regulations for the purposes of specifying how the proceeds referred to in subsection (5.1) are to be distributed.

 Marginal note: Order refusing forfeiture
 (6)  Where a judge refuses an application under subsection (1) in respect of any property, the judge shall make an order that describes the property and declares that it is not property referred to in that subsection.

 Marginal note: Notice
 (7)  On an application under subsection (1), a judge may require notice to be given to any person who, in the opinion of the Court, appears to have an interest in the property, and any such person shall be entitled to be added as a respondent to the application.

 Marginal note: Third party interests
 (8)  If a judge is satisfied that a person referred to in subsection (7) has an interest in property that is subject to an application, has exercised reasonable care to ensure that the property would not be used to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity, and is not a member of a terrorist group, the judge shall order that the interest is not affected by the forfeiture. Such an order shall declare the nature and extent of the interest in question.

 Marginal note: Dwelling-house
 (9)  Where all or part of property that is the subject of an application under subsection (1) is a dwelling-house, the judge shall also consider
 (a)  the impact of an order of forfeiture on any member of the immediate family of the person who owns or controls the dwelling-house, if the dwelling-house was the member’s principal residence at the time the dwelling-house was ordered restrained or at the time the forfeiture application was made and continues to be the member’s principal residence; and

 (b)  whether the member appears innocent of any complicity or collusion in the terrorist activity.

 Marginal note: Motion to vary or set aside
 (10)  A person who claims an interest in property that was forfeited and who did not receive notice under subsection (7) may bring a motion to the Federal Court to vary or set aside an order made under subsection (5) not later than 60 days after the day on which the forfeiture order was made.

 Marginal note: No extension of time
 (11)  The Court may not extend the period set out in subsection (10).

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Disposition of property
 83.15  Subsection 462.42(6) and sections 462.43 and 462.46 apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to property subject to a warrant or restraint order issued under subsection 83.13(1) or ordered forfeited under subsection 83.14(5).
 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Interim preservation rights
 83.16   (1)  Pending any appeal of an order made under section 83.14, property restrained under an order issued under section 83.13 shall continue to be restrained, property seized under a warrant issued under that section shall continue to be detained, and any person appointed to manage, control or otherwise deal with that property under that section shall continue in that capacity.

 Marginal note: Appeal of refusal to grant order
 (2)  Section 462.34 applies, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to an appeal taken in respect of a refusal to grant an order under subsection 83.14(5).

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Other forfeiture provisions unaffected
 83.17   (1)  This Part does not affect the operation of any other provision of this or any other Act of Parliament respecting the forfeiture of property.

 Marginal note: Priority for restitution to victims of crime
 (2)  Property is subject to forfeiture under subsection 83.14(5) only to the extent that it is not required to satisfy the operation of any other provision of this or any other Act of Parliament respecting restitution to, or compensation of, persons affected by the commission of offences.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Participating, Facilitating, Instructing and Harbouring
 Marginal note: Participation in activity of terrorist group
 83.18   (1)  Every one who knowingly participates in or contributes to, directly or indirectly, any activity of a terrorist group for the purpose of enhancing the ability of any terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Prosecution
 (2)  An offence may be committed under subsection (1) whether or not
 (a)  a terrorist group actually facilitates or carries out a terrorist activity;

 (b)  the participation or contribution of the accused actually enhances the ability of a terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity; or

 (c)  the accused knows the specific nature of any terrorist activity that may be facilitated or carried out by a terrorist group.

 Marginal note: Meaning of participating or contributing
 (3)  Participating in or contributing to an activity of a terrorist group includes
 (a)  providing, receiving or recruiting a person to receive training;

 (b)  providing or offering to provide a skill or an expertise for the benefit of, at the direction of or in association with a terrorist group;

 (c)  recruiting a person in order to facilitate or commit
 (i)  a terrorism offence, or

 (ii)  an act or omission outside Canada that, if committed in Canada, would be a terrorism offence;

 (d)  entering or remaining in any country for the benefit of, at the direction of or in association with a terrorist group; and

 (e)  making oneself, in response to instructions from any of the persons who constitute a terrorist group, available to facilitate or commit
 (i)  a terrorism offence, or

 (ii)  an act or omission outside Canada that, if committed in Canada, would be a terrorism offence.

 Marginal note: Factors
 (4)  In determining whether an accused participates in or contributes to any activity of a terrorist group, the court may consider, among other factors, whether the accused
 (a)  uses a name, word, symbol or other representation that identifies, or is associated with, the terrorist group;

 (b)  frequently associates with any of the persons who constitute the terrorist group;

 (c)  receives any benefit from the terrorist group; or

 (d)  repeatedly engages in activities at the instruction of any of the persons who constitute the terrorist group.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Facilitating terrorist activity
 83.19   (1)  Every one who knowingly facilitates a terrorist activity is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 Marginal note: Facilitation
 (2)  For the purposes of this Part, a terrorist activity is facilitated whether or not
 (a)  the facilitator knows that a particular terrorist activity is facilitated;

 (b)  any particular terrorist activity was foreseen or planned at the time it was facilitated; or

 (c)  any terrorist activity was actually carried out.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Commission of offence for terrorist group
 83.2  Every one who commits an indictable offence under this or any other Act of Parliament for the benefit of, at the direction of or in association with a terrorist group is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.
 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Instructing to carry out activity for terrorist group
 83.21   (1)  Every person who knowingly instructs, directly or indirectly, any person to carry out any activity for the benefit of, at the direction of or in association with a terrorist group, for the purpose of enhancing the ability of any terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Prosecution
 (2)  An offence may be committed under subsection (1) whether or not
 (a)  the activity that the accused instructs to be carried out is actually carried out;

 (b)  the accused instructs a particular person to carry out the activity referred to in paragraph (a);

 (c)  the accused knows the identity of the person whom the accused instructs to carry out the activity referred to in paragraph (a);

 (d)  the person whom the accused instructs to carry out the activity referred to in paragraph (a) knows that it is to be carried out for the benefit of, at the direction of or in association with a terrorist group;

 (e)  a terrorist group actually facilitates or carries out a terrorist activity;

 (f)  the activity referred to in paragraph (a) actually enhances the ability of a terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity; or

 (g)  the accused knows the specific nature of any terrorist activity that may be facilitated or carried out by a terrorist group.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Instructing to carry out terrorist activity
 83.22   (1)  Every person who knowingly instructs, directly or indirectly, any person to carry out a terrorist activity is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Prosecution
 (2)  An offence may be committed under subsection (1) whether or not
 (a)  the terrorist activity is actually carried out;

 (b)  the accused instructs a particular person to carry out the terrorist activity;

 (c)  the accused knows the identity of the person whom the accused instructs to carry out the terrorist activity; or

 (d)  the person whom the accused instructs to carry out the terrorist activity knows that it is a terrorist activity.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Harbouring or concealing
 83.23  Every one who knowingly harbours or conceals any person whom he or she knows to be a person who has carried out or is likely to carry out a terrorist activity, for the purpose of enabling the person to facilitate or carry out any terrorist activity, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.
 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Hoax Regarding Terrorist Activity
 Marginal note: Hoax — terrorist activity
 83.231   (1)  Every one commits an offence who, without lawful excuse and with intent to cause any person to fear death, bodily harm, substantial damage to property or serious interference with the lawful use or operation of property,
 (a)  conveys or causes or procures to be conveyed information that, in all the circumstances, is likely to cause a reasonable apprehension that terrorist activity is occurring or will occur, without believing the information to be true; or

 (b)  commits an act that, in all the circumstances, is likely to cause a reasonable apprehension that terrorist activity is occurring or will occur, without believing that such activity is occurring or will occur.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Causing bodily harm
 (3)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1) and thereby causes bodily harm to any other person is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months.

 Marginal note: Causing death
 (4)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1) and thereby causes the death of any other person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 2004, c. 15, s. 32

 Proceedings and Aggravated Punishment
 Marginal note: Attorney General’s consent
 83.24  Proceedings in respect of a terrorism offence or an offence under section 83.12 shall not be commenced without the consent of the Attorney General.
 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Jurisdiction
 83.25   (1)  Where a person is alleged to have committed a terrorism offence or an offence under section 83.12, proceedings in respect of that offence may, whether or not that person is in Canada, be commenced at the instance of the Government of Canada and conducted by the Attorney General of Canada or counsel acting on his or her behalf in any territorial division in Canada, if the offence is alleged to have occurred outside the province in which the proceedings are commenced, whether or not proceedings have previously been commenced elsewhere in Canada.

 Marginal note: Trial and punishment
 (2)  An accused may be tried and punished in respect of an offence referred to in subsection (1) in the same manner as if the offence had been committed in the territorial division where the proceeding is conducted.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Sentences to be served consecutively
 83.26  A sentence, other than one of life imprisonment, imposed on a person for an offence under any of sections 83.02 to 83.04 and 83.18 to 83.23 shall be served consecutively to
 (a)  any other punishment imposed on the person, other than a sentence of life imprisonment, for an offence arising out of the same event or series of events; and

 (b)  any other sentence, other than one of life imprisonment, to which the person is subject at the time the sentence is imposed on the person for an offence under any of those sections.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Punishment for terrorist activity
 83.27   (1)  Notwithstanding anything in this Act, a person convicted of an indictable offence, other than an offence for which a sentence of imprisonment for life is imposed as a minimum punishment, where the act or omission constituting the offence also constitutes a terrorist activity, is liable to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Offender must be notified
 (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply unless the prosecutor satisfies the court that the offender, before making a plea, was notified that the application of that subsection would be sought.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Investigative Hearing
 Definition of judge
 83.28   (1)  In this section and section 83.29, judge means a provincial court judge or a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction.

 Marginal note: Order for gathering evidence
 (2)  Subject to subsection (3), a peace officer may, for the purposes of an investigation of a terrorism offence, apply ex parte to a judge for an order for the gathering of information.

 Marginal note: Attorney General’s consent
 (3)  A peace officer may make an application under subsection (2) only if the prior consent of the Attorney General was obtained.

 Marginal note: Making of order
 (4)  A judge to whom an application is made under subsection (2) may make an order for the gathering of information if the judge is satisfied that the consent of the Attorney General was obtained as required by subsection (3) and
 (a)  that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
 (i)  a terrorism offence has been committed, and

 (ii)  information concerning the offence, or information that may reveal the whereabouts of a person suspected by the peace officer of having committed the offence, is likely to be obtained as a result of the order; or

 (b)  that
 (i)  there are reasonable grounds to believe that a terrorism offence will be committed,

 (ii)  there are reasonable grounds to believe that a person has direct and material information that relates to a terrorism offence referred to in subparagraph (i), or that may reveal the whereabouts of an individual who the peace officer suspects may commit a terrorism offence referred to in that subparagraph, and

 (iii)  reasonable attempts have been made to obtain the information referred to in subparagraph (ii) from the person referred to in that subparagraph.

 Marginal note: Contents of order
 (5)  An order made under subsection (4) may
 (a)  order the examination, on oath or not, of a person named in the order;

 (b)  order the person to attend at the place fixed by the judge, or by the judge designated under paragraph (d), as the case may be, for the examination and to remain in attendance until excused by the presiding judge;

 (c)  order the person to bring to the examination any thing in their possession or control, and produce it to the presiding judge;

 (d)  designate another judge as the judge before whom the examination is to take place; and

 (e)  include any other terms or conditions that the judge considers desirable, including terms or conditions for the protection of the interests of the person named in the order and of third parties or for the protection of any ongoing investigation.

 Marginal note: Execution of order
 (6)  An order made under subsection (4) may be executed anywhere in Canada.

 Marginal note: Variation of order
 (7)  The judge who made the order under subsection (4), or another judge of the same court, may vary its terms and conditions.

 Marginal note: Obligation to answer questions and produce things
 (8)  A person named in an order made under subsection (4) shall answer questions put to the person by the Attorney General or the Attorney General’s agent, and shall produce to the presiding judge things that the person was ordered to bring, but may refuse if answering a question or producing a thing would disclose information that is protected by any law relating to non-disclosure of information or to privilege.

 Marginal note: Judge to rule
 (9)  The presiding judge shall rule on any objection or other issue relating to a refusal to answer a question or to produce a thing.

 Marginal note: No person excused from complying with subsection (8)
 (10)  No person shall be excused from answering a question or producing a thing under subsection (8) on the ground that the answer or thing may tend to incriminate the person or subject the person to any proceeding or penalty, but
 (a)  no answer given or thing produced under subsection (8) shall be used or received against the person in any criminal proceedings against that person, other than a prosecution under section 132 or 136; and

 (b)  no evidence derived from the evidence obtained from the person shall be used or received against the person in any criminal proceedings against that person, other than a prosecution under section 132 or 136.

 Marginal note: Right to counsel
 (11)  A person has the right to retain and instruct counsel at any stage of the proceedings.

 Marginal note: Order for custody of thing
 (12)  The presiding judge, if satisfied that any thing produced during the course of the examination will likely be relevant to the investigation of any terrorism offence, shall order that the thing be given into the custody of the peace officer or someone acting on the peace officer’s behalf.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Arrest warrant
 83.29   (1)  The judge who made the order under subsection 83.28(4), or another judge of the same court, may issue a warrant for the arrest of the person named in the order if the judge is satisfied, on an information in writing and under oath, that the person
 (a)  is evading service of the order;

 (b)  is about to abscond; or

 (c)  did not attend the examination, or did not remain in attendance, as required by the order.

 Marginal note: Execution of warrant
 (2)  A warrant issued under subsection (1) may be executed at any place in Canada by any peace officer having jurisdiction in that place.

 Marginal note: Person to be brought before judge
 (3)  A peace officer who arrests a person in the execution of a warrant issued under subsection (1) shall, without delay, bring the person, or cause the person to be brought, before the judge who issued the warrant or another judge of the same court. The judge in question may, to ensure compliance with the order, order that the person be detained in custody or released on recognizance, with or without sureties.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Recognizance with Conditions
 Marginal note: Attorney General’s consent required to lay information
 83.3   (1)  The consent of the Attorney General is required before a peace officer may lay an information under subsection (2).

 Marginal note: Terrorist activity
 (2)  Subject to subsection (1), a peace officer may lay an information before a provincial court judge if the peace officer
 (a)  believes on reasonable grounds that a terrorist activity will be carried out; and

 (b)  suspects on reasonable grounds that the imposition of a recognizance with conditions on a person, or the arrest of a person, is necessary to prevent the carrying out of the terrorist activity.

 Marginal note: Appearance
 (3)  A provincial court judge who receives an information under subsection (2) may cause the person to appear before the provincial court judge.

 Marginal note: Arrest without warrant
 (4)  Notwithstanding subsections (2) and (3), if
 (a)  either
 (i)  the grounds for laying an information referred to in paragraphs (2)(a) and (b) exist but, by reason of exigent circumstances, it would be impracticable to lay an information under subsection (2), or

 (ii)  an information has been laid under subsection (2) and a summons has been issued, and

 (b)  the peace officer suspects on reasonable grounds that the detention of the person in custody is necessary in order to prevent a terrorist activity,

 the peace officer may arrest the person without warrant and cause the person to be detained in custody, to be taken before a provincial court judge in accordance with subsection (6).

 Marginal note: Duty of peace officer
 (5)  If a peace officer arrests a person without warrant in the circumstance described in subparagraph (4)(a)(i), the peace officer shall, within the time prescribed by paragraph (6)(a) or (b),
 (a)  lay an information in accordance with subsection (2); or

 (b)  release the person.

 Marginal note: When person to be taken before judge
 (6)  A person detained in custody shall be taken before a provincial court judge in accordance with the following rules:
 (a)  if a provincial court judge is available within a period of twenty-four hours after the person has been arrested, the person shall be taken before a provincial court judge without unreasonable delay and in any event within that period, and

 (b)  if a provincial court judge is not available within a period of twenty-four hours after the person has been arrested, the person shall be taken before a provincial court judge as soon as possible,

 unless, at any time before the expiry of the time prescribed in paragraph (a) or (b) for taking the person before a provincial court judge, the peace officer, or an officer in charge within the meaning of Part XV, is satisfied that the person should be released from custody unconditionally, and so releases the person.

 Marginal note: How person dealt with
 (7)  When a person is taken before a provincial court judge under subsection (6),
 (a)  if an information has not been laid under subsection (2), the judge shall order that the person be released; or

 (b)  if an information has been laid under subsection (2),
 (i)  the judge shall order that the person be released unless the peace officer who laid the information shows cause why the detention of the person in custody is justified on one or more of the following grounds:
 (A)  the detention is necessary to ensure the person’s appearance before a provincial court judge in order to be dealt with in accordance with subsection (8),

 (B)  the detention is necessary for the protection or safety of the public, including any witness, having regard to all the circumstances including
 (I)  the likelihood that, if the person is released from custody, a terrorist activity will be carried out, and

 (II)  any substantial likelihood that the person will, if released from custody, interfere with the administration of justice, and

 (C)  any other just cause and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, that the detention is necessary in order to maintain confidence in the administration of justice, having regard to all the circumstances, including the apparent strength of the peace officer’s grounds under subsection (2), and the gravity of any terrorist activity that may be carried out, and

 (ii)  the judge may adjourn the matter for a hearing under subsection (8) but, if the person is not released under subparagraph (i), the adjournment may not exceed forty-eight hours.

 Marginal note: Hearing before judge
 (8)  The provincial court judge before whom the person appears pursuant to subsection (3)
 (a)  may, if satisfied by the evidence adduced that the peace officer has reasonable grounds for the suspicion, order that the person enter into a recognizance to keep the peace and be of good behaviour for any period that does not exceed twelve months and to comply with any other reasonable conditions prescribed in the recognizance, including the conditions set out in subsection (10), that the provincial court judge considers desirable for preventing the carrying out of a terrorist activity; and

 (b)  if the person was not released under subparagraph (7)(b)(i), shall order that the person be released, subject to the recognizance, if any, ordered under paragraph (a).

 Marginal note: Refusal to enter into recognizance
 (9)  The provincial court judge may commit the person to prison for a term not exceeding twelve months if the person fails or refuses to enter into the recognizance.

 Marginal note: Conditions — firearms
 (10)  Before making an order under paragraph (8)(a), the provincial court judge shall consider whether it is desirable, in the interests of the safety of the person or of any other person, to include as a condition of the recognizance that the person be prohibited from possessing any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance, or all of those things, for any period specified in the recognizance, and where the provincial court judge decides that it is so desirable, the provincial court judge shall add such a condition to the recognizance.

 Marginal note: Surrender, etc.
 (11)  If the provincial court judge adds a condition described in subsection (10) to a recognizance, the provincial court judge shall specify in the recognizance the manner and method by which
 (a)  the things referred to in that subsection that are in the possession of the person shall be surrendered, disposed of, detained, stored or dealt with; and

 (b)  the authorizations, licences and registration certificates held by the person shall be surrendered.

 Marginal note: Reasons
 (12)  If the provincial court judge does not add a condition described in subsection (10) to a recognizance, the provincial court judge shall include in the record a statement of the reasons for not adding the condition.

 Marginal note: Variance of conditions
 (13)  The provincial court judge may, on application of the peace officer, the Attorney General or the person, vary the conditions fixed in the recognizance.

 Marginal note: Other provisions to apply
 (14)  Subsections 810(4) and (5) apply, with any modifications that the circumstances require, to proceedings under this section.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Annual report (sections 83.28 and 83.29)
 83.31   (1)  The Attorney General of Canada shall prepare and cause to be laid before Parliament and the Attorney General of every province shall publish or otherwise make available to the public an annual report for the previous year on the operation of sections 83.28 and 83.29 that includes
 (a)  the number of consents to make an application that were sought, and the number that were obtained, by virtue of subsections 83.28(2) and (3);

 (b)  the number of orders for the gathering of information that were made under subsection 83.28(4); and

 (c)  the number of arrests that were made with a warrant issued under section 83.29.

 Marginal note: Annual report (section 83.3)
 (2)  The Attorney General of Canada shall prepare and cause to be laid before Parliament and the Attorney General of every province shall publish or otherwise make available to the public an annual report for the previous year on the operation of section 83.3 that includes
 (a)  the number of consents to lay an information that were sought, and the number that were obtained, by virtue of subsections 83.3(1) and (2);

 (b)  the number of cases in which a summons or a warrant of arrest was issued for the purposes of subsection 83.3(3);

 (c)  the number of cases where a person was not released under subsection 83.3(7) pending a hearing;

 (d)  the number of cases in which an order to enter into a recognizance was made under paragraph 83.3(8)(a), and the types of conditions that were imposed;

 (e)  the number of times that a person failed or refused to enter into a recognizance, and the term of imprisonment imposed under subsection 83.3(9) in each case; and

 (f)  the number of cases in which the conditions fixed in a recognizance were varied under subsection 83.3(13).

 Marginal note: Annual report (section 83.3)
 (3)  The Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness shall prepare and cause to be laid before Parliament and the Minister responsible for policing in every province shall publish or otherwise make available to the public an annual report for the previous year on the operation of section 83.3 that includes
 (a)  the number of arrests without warrant that were made under subsection 83.3(4) and the period of the arrested person’s detention in custody in each case; and

 (b)  the number of cases in which a person was arrested without warrant under subsection 83.3(4) and was released
 (i)  by a peace officer under paragraph 83.3(5)(b), or

 (ii)  by a judge under paragraph 83.3(7)(a).

 Marginal note: Limitation
 (4)  The annual report shall not contain any information the disclosure of which would
 (a)  compromise or hinder an ongoing investigation of an offence under an Act of Parliament;

 (b)  endanger the life or safety of any person;

 (c)  prejudice a legal proceeding; or

 (d)  otherwise be contrary to the public interest.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4
 2005, c. 10, s. 34

 Marginal note: Sunset provision
 83.32   (1)  Sections 83.28, 83.29 and 83.3 cease to apply at the end of the fifteenth sitting day of Parliament after December 31, 2006 unless, before the end of that day, the application of those sections is extended by a resolution — the text of which is established under subsection (2) — passed by both Houses of Parliament in accordance with the rules set out in subsection (3).

 Marginal note: Order in Council
 (2)  The Governor General in Council may, by order, establish the text of a resolution providing for the extension of the application of sections 83.28, 83.29 and 83.3 and specifying the period of the extension, which may not exceed five years from the first day on which the resolution has been passed by both Houses of Parliament.

 Marginal note: Rules
 (3)  A motion for the adoption of the resolution may be debated in both Houses of Parliament but may not be amended. At the conclusion of the debate, the Speaker of the House of Parliament shall immediately put every question necessary to determine whether or not the motion is concurred in.

 Marginal note: Subsequent extensions
 (4)  The application of sections 83.28, 83.29 and 83.3 may be further extended in accordance with the procedure set out in this section, with the words “December 31, 2006” in subsection (1) read as “the expiration of the most recent extension under this section”.

 Definition of sitting day of Parliament
 (5)  In subsection (1), sitting day of Parliament means a day on which both Houses of Parliament sit.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 Marginal note: Transitional provision
 83.33   (1)  In the event that sections 83.28 and 83.29 cease to apply pursuant to section 83.32, proceedings commenced under those sections shall be completed if the hearing before the judge of the application made under subsection 83.28(2) began before those sections ceased to apply.

 Marginal note: Transitional provision
 (2)  In the event that section 83.3 ceases to apply pursuant to section 83.32, a person detained in custody under section 83.3 shall be released when that section ceases to apply, except that subsections 83.3(7) to (14) continue to apply to a person who was taken before a judge under subsection 83.3(6) before section 83.3 ceased to apply.

 2001, c. 41, s. 4

 PART III Firearms and Other Weapons
 Interpretation
 Marginal note: Definitions
 84   (1)  In this Part and subsections 491(1), 515(4.1) and (4.11) and 810(3.1) and (3.11),
 ammunition
 munitions
 ammunition means a cartridge containing a projectile designed to be discharged from a firearm and, without restricting the generality of the foregoing, includes a caseless cartridge and a shot shell; ( munitions )
 antique firearm
 arme à feu historique
 antique firearm means
 (a)  any firearm manufactured before 1898 that was not designed to discharge rim-fire or centre-fire ammunition and that has not been redesigned to discharge such ammunition, or

 (b)  any firearm that is prescribed to be an antique firearm; ( arme à feu historique )

 authorization
 autorisation
 authorization means an authorization issued under the Firearms Act ; ( autorisation )
 automatic firearm
 arme automatique
 automatic firearm means a firearm that is capable of, or assembled or designed and manufactured with the capability of, discharging projectiles in rapid succession during one pressure of the trigger; ( arme automatique )
 cartridge magazine
 chargeur
 cartridge magazine means a device or container from which ammunition may be fed into the firing chamber of a firearm; ( chargeur )
 chief firearms officer
 contrôleur des armes à feu
 chief firearms officer means a chief firearms officer as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Firearms Act ; ( contrôleur des armes à feu )
 Commissioner of Firearms
 commissaire aux armes à feu
 Commissioner of Firearms means the Commissioner of Firearms appointed under section 81.1 of the Firearms Act ; ( commissaire aux armes à feu )
 cross-bow
 arbalète
 cross-bow means a device with a bow and a bowstring mounted on a stock that is designed to propel an arrow, a bolt, a quarrel or any similar projectile on a trajectory guided by a barrel or groove and that is capable of causing serious bodily injury or death to a person; ( arbalète )
 export
 exporter
 export means export from Canada and, for greater certainty, includes the exportation of goods from Canada that are imported into Canada and shipped in transit through Canada; ( exporter )
 firearms officer
 préposé aux armes à feu
 firearms officer means a firearms officer as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Firearms Act ; ( préposé aux armes à feu )
 handgun
 arme de poing
 handgun means a firearm that is designed, altered or intended to be aimed and fired by the action of one hand, whether or not it has been redesigned or subsequently altered to be aimed and fired by the action of both hands; ( arme de poing )
 imitation firearm
 fausse arme à feu
 imitation firearm means any thing that imitates a firearm, and includes a replica firearm; ( fausse arme à feu )
 import
 importer
 import means import into Canada and, for greater certainty, includes the importation of goods into Canada that are shipped in transit through Canada and exported from Canada; ( importer )
 licence
 permis
 licence means a licence issued under the Firearms Act ; ( permis )
 prescribed
 Version anglaise seulement prescribed means prescribed by the regulations; ( Version anglaise seulement )
 prohibited ammunition
 munitions prohibées
 prohibited ammunition means ammunition, or a projectile of any kind, that is prescribed to be prohibited ammunition; ( munitions prohibées )
 prohibited device
 dispositif prohibé
 prohibited device means
 (a)  any component or part of a weapon, or any accessory for use with a weapon, that is prescribed to be a prohibited device,

 (b)  a handgun barrel that is equal to or less than 105 mm in length, but does not include any such handgun barrel that is prescribed, where the handgun barrel is for use in international sporting competitions governed by the rules of the International Shooting Union,

 (c)  a device or contrivance designed or intended to muffle or stop the sound or report of a firearm,

 (d)  a cartridge magazine that is prescribed to be a prohibited device, or

 (e)  a replica firearm; ( dispositif prohibé )

 prohibited firearm
 arme à feu prohibée
 prohibited firearm means
 (a)  a handgun that
 (i)  has a barrel equal to or less than 105 mm in length, or

 (ii)  is designed or adapted to discharge a 25 or 32 calibre cartridge,

 but does not include any such handgun that is prescribed, where the handgun is for use in international sporting competitions governed by the rules of the International Shooting Union,

 (b)  a firearm that is adapted from a rifle or shotgun, whether by sawing, cutting or any other alteration, and that, as so adapted,
 (i)  is less than 660 mm in length, or

 (ii)  is 660 mm or greater in length and has a barrel less than 457 mm in length,

 (c)  an automatic firearm, whether or not it has been altered to discharge only one projectile with one pressure of the trigger, or

 (d)  any firearm that is prescribed to be a prohibited firearm; ( arme à feu prohibée )

 prohibited weapon
 arme prohibée
 prohibited weapon means
 (a)  a knife that has a blade that opens automatically by gravity or centrifugal force or by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in or attached to the handle of the knife, or

 (b)  any weapon, other than a firearm, that is prescribed to be a prohibited weapon; ( arme prohibée )

 prohibition order
 ordonnance d’interdiction
 prohibition order means an order made under this Act or any other Act of Parliament prohibiting a person from possessing any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance, or all such things; ( ordonnance d’interdiction )
 Registrar
 directeur
 Registrar means the Registrar of Firearms appointed under section 82 of the Firearms Act ; ( directeur )
 registration certificate
 certificat d’enregistrement
 registration certificate means a registration certificate issued under the Firearms Act ; ( certificat d’enregistrement )
 replica firearm
 réplique
 replica firearm means any device that is designed or intended to exactly resemble, or to resemble with near precision, a firearm, and that itself is not a firearm, but does not include any such device that is designed or intended to exactly resemble, or to resemble with near precision, an antique firearm; ( réplique )
 restricted firearm
 arme à feu à autorisation restreinte
 restricted firearm means
 (a)  a handgun that is not a prohibited firearm,

 (b)  a firearm that
 (i)  is not a prohibited firearm,

 (ii)  has a barrel less than 470 mm in length, and

 (iii)  is capable of discharging centre-fire ammunition in a semi-automatic manner,

 (c)  a firearm that is designed or adapted to be fired when reduced to a length of less than 660 mm by folding, telescoping or otherwise, or

 (d)  a firearm of any other kind that is prescribed to be a restricted firearm; ( arme à feu à autorisation restreinte )

 restricted weapon
 arme à autorisation restreinte
 restricted weapon means any weapon, other than a firearm, that is prescribed to be a restricted weapon; ( arme à autorisation restreinte )
 superior court
 cour supérieure
 superior court means
 (a)  in Ontario, the Superior Court of Justice, sitting in the region, district or county or group of counties where the relevant adjudication was made,

 (b)  in Quebec, the Superior Court,

 (c)  in New Brunswick, Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta, the Court of Queen’s Bench,

 (d)  in Nova Scotia, British Columbia and a territory, the Supreme Court, and

 (e)  in Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland, the Trial Division of the Supreme Court; ( cour supérieure )

 transfer
 cession
 transfer means sell, provide, barter, give, lend, rent, send, transport, ship, distribute or deliver. ( cession )

 Marginal note: Barrel length
 (2)  For the purposes of this Part, the length of a barrel of a firearm is
 (a)  in the case of a revolver, the distance from the muzzle of the barrel to the breach end immediately in front of the cylinder, and

 (b)  in any other case, the distance from the muzzle of the barrel to and including the chamber,

 but does not include the length of any component, part or accessory including any component, part or accessory designed or intended to suppress the muzzle flash or reduce recoil.

 Marginal note: Certain weapons deemed not to be firearms
 (3)  For the purposes of sections 91 to 95, 99 to 101, 103 to 107 and 117.03 of this Act and the provisions of the Firearms Act , the following weapons are deemed not to be firearms:
 (a)  any antique firearm;

 (b)  any device that is
 (i)  designed exclusively for signalling, for notifying of distress, for firing blank cartridges or for firing stud cartridges, explosive-driven rivets or other industrial projectiles, and

 (ii)  intended by the person in possession of it to be used exclusively for the purpose for which it is designed;

 (c)  any shooting device that is
 (i)  designed exclusively for the slaughtering of domestic animals, the tranquillizing of animals or the discharging of projectiles with lines attached to them, and

 (ii)  intended by the person in possession of it to be used exclusively for the purpose for which it is designed; and

 (d)  any other barrelled weapon, where it is proved that the weapon is not designed or adapted to discharge
 (i)  a shot, bullet or other projectile at a muzzle velocity exceeding 152.4 m per second or at a muzzle energy exceeding 5.7 Joules, or

 (ii)  a shot, bullet or other projectile that is designed or adapted to attain a velocity exceeding 152.4 m per second or an energy exceeding 5.7 Joules.

 Marginal note: Exception — antique firearms
 (3.1)  Notwithstanding subsection (3), an antique firearm is a firearm for the purposes of regulations made under paragraph 117(h) of the Firearms Act and subsection 86(2) of this Act.

 Marginal note: Meaning of “holder”
 (4)  For the purposes of this Part, a person is the holder of
 (a)  an authorization or a licence if the authorization or licence has been issued to the person and the person continues to hold it; and

 (b)  a registration certificate for a firearm if
 (i)  the registration certificate has been issued to the person and the person continues to hold it, or

 (ii)  the person possesses the registration certificate with the permission of its lawful holder.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 84
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), ss. 185(F), 186
 1991, c. 40, s. 2
 1995, c. 39, s. 139
 1998, c. 30, s. 16
 2003, c. 8, s. 2

 Use Offences
 Marginal note: Using firearm in commission of offence
 85   (1)  Every person commits an offence who uses a firearm
 (a)  while committing an indictable offence, other than an offence under section 220 (criminal negligence causing death), 236 (manslaughter), 239 (attempted murder), 244 (causing bodily harm with intent — firearm), 272 (sexual assault with a weapon) or 273 (aggravated sexual assault), subsection 279(1) (kidnapping) or section 279.1 (hostage-taking), 344 (robbery) or 346 (extortion),

 (b)  while attempting to commit an indictable offence, or

 (c)  during flight after committing or attempting to commit an indictable offence,

 whether or not the person causes or means to cause bodily harm to any person as a result of using the firearm.

 Marginal note: Using imitation firearm in commission of offence
 (2)  Every person commits an offence who uses an imitation firearm
 (a)  while committing an indictable offence,

 (b)  while attempting to commit an indictable offence, or

 (c)  during flight after committing or attempting to commit an indictable offence,

 whether or not the person causes or means to cause bodily harm to any person as a result of using the imitation firearm.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) or (2) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  in the case of a first offence, except as provided in paragraph (b), to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year;

 (b)  in the case of a first offence committed by a person who, before January 1, 1978, was convicted of an indictable offence, or an attempt to commit an indictable offence, in the course of which or during flight after the commission or attempted commission of which the person used a firearm, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of three years; and

 (c)  in the case of a second or subsequent offence, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of three years.

 Marginal note: Sentences to be served consecutively
 (4)  A sentence imposed on a person for an offence under subsection (1) or (2) shall be served consecutively to any other punishment imposed on the person for an offence arising out of the same event or series of events and to any other sentence to which the person is subject at the time the sentence is imposed on the person for an offence under subsection (1) or (2).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 85
 1995, c. 39, s. 139
 2003, c. 8, s. 3

 Marginal note: Careless use of firearm, etc.
 86   (1)  Every person commits an offence who, without lawful excuse, uses, carries, handles, ships, transports or stores a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or any ammunition or prohibited ammunition in a careless manner or without reasonable precautions for the safety of other persons.

 Marginal note: Contravention of storage regulations, etc.
 (2)  Every person commits an offence who contravenes a regulation made under paragraph 117(h) of the Firearms Act respecting the storage, handling, transportation, shipping, display, advertising and mail-order sales of firearms and restricted weapons.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) or (2)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment
 (i)  in the case of a first offence, for a term not exceeding two years, and

 (ii)  in the case of a second or subsequent offence, for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 86
 1991, c. 40, s. 3
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Pointing a firearm
 87   (1)  Every person commits an offence who, without lawful excuse, points a firearm at another person, whether the firearm is loaded or unloaded.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 87
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Possession Offences
 Marginal note: Possession of weapon for dangerous purpose
 88   (1)  Every person commits an offence who carries or possesses a weapon, an imitation of a weapon, a prohibited device or any ammunition or prohibited ammunition for a purpose dangerous to the public peace or for the purpose of committing an offence.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 88
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Carrying weapon while attending public meeting
 89   (1)  Every person commits an offence who, without lawful excuse, carries a weapon, a prohibited device or any ammunition or prohibited ammunition while the person is attending or is on the way to attend a public meeting.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 89
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Carrying concealed weapon
 90   (1)  Every person commits an offence who carries a weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition concealed, unless the person is authorized under the Firearms Act to carry it concealed.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 90
 1991, c. 28, s. 6, c. 40, ss. 4, 35
 1994, c. 44, s. 6
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Unauthorized possession of firearm
 91   (1)  Subject to subsections (4) and (5) and section 98, every person commits an offence who possesses a firearm, unless the person is the holder of
 (a)  a licence under which the person may possess it; and

 (b)  a registration certificate for the firearm.

 Marginal note: Unauthorized possession of prohibited weapon or restricted weapon
 (2)  Subject to subsection (4) and section 98, every person commits an offence who possesses a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, other than a replica firearm, or any prohibited ammunition, unless the person is the holder of a licence under which the person may possess it.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) or (2)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Exceptions
 (4)  Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to
 (a)  a person who possesses a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition while the person is under the direct and immediate supervision of a person who may lawfully possess it, for the purpose of using it in a manner in which the supervising person may lawfully use it; or

 (b)  a person who comes into possession of a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition by the operation of law and who, within a reasonable period after acquiring possession of it,
 (i)  lawfully disposes of it, or

 (ii)  obtains a licence under which the person may possess it and, in the case of a firearm, a registration certificate for the firearm.

 Marginal note: Borrowed firearm for sustenance
 (5)  Subsection (1) does not apply to a person who possesses a firearm that is neither a prohibited firearm nor a restricted firearm and who is not the holder of a registration certificate for the firearm if the person
 (a)  has borrowed the firearm;

 (b)  is the holder of a licence under which the person may possess it; and

 (c)  is in possession of the firearm to hunt or trap in order to sustain the person or the person’s family.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 91
 1991, c. 28, s. 7, c. 40, ss. 5, 36
 1995, c. 22, s. 10, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Possession of firearm knowing its possession is unauthorized
 92   (1)  Subject to subsections (4) and (5) and section 98, every person commits an offence who possesses a firearm knowing that the person is not the holder of
 (a)  a licence under which the person may possess it; and

 (b)  a registration certificate for the firearm.

 Marginal note: Possession of prohibited weapon, device or ammunition knowing its possession is unauthorized
 (2)  Subject to subsection (4) and section 98, every person commits an offence who possesses a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, other than a replica firearm, or any prohibited ammunition knowing that the person is not the holder of a licence under which the person may possess it.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) or (2) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  in the case of a first offence, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years;

 (b)  in the case of a second offence, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year; and

 (c)  in the case of a third or subsequent offence, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of two years less a day.

 Marginal note: Exceptions
 (4)  Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to
 (a)  a person who possesses a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition while the person is under the direct and immediate supervision of a person who may lawfully possess it, for the purpose of using it in a manner in which the supervising person may lawfully use it; or

 (b)  a person who comes into possession of a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition by the operation of law and who, within a reasonable period after acquiring possession of it,
 (i)  lawfully disposes of it, or

 (ii)  obtains a licence under which the person may possess it and, in the case of a firearm, a registration certificate for the firearm.

 Marginal note: Borrowed firearm for sustenance
 (5)  Subsection (1) does not apply to a person who possesses a firearm that is neither a prohibited firearm nor a restricted firearm and who is not the holder of a registration certificate for the firearm if the person
 (a)  has borrowed the firearm;

 (b)  is the holder of a licence under which the person may possess it; and

 (c)  is in possession of the firearm to hunt or trap in order to sustain the person or the person’s family.

 Marginal note: Evidence for previous conviction
 (6)  Where a person is charged with an offence under subsection (1), evidence that the person was convicted of an offence under subsection 112(1) of the Firearms Act is admissible at any stage of the proceedings and may be taken into consideration for the purpose of proving that the person knew that the person was not the holder of a registration certificate for the firearm to which the offence relates.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 92
 R.S., 1985, c. 1 (2nd Supp.), s. 213
 1991, c. 40, s. 7
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Possession at unauthorized place
 93   (1)  Subject to subsection (3) and section 98, every person commits an offence who, being the holder of an authorization or a licence under which the person may possess a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or prohibited ammunition, possesses the firearm, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device or prohibited ammunition at a place that is
 (a)  indicated on the authorization or licence as being a place where the person may not possess it;

 (b)  other than a place indicated on the authorization or licence as being a place where the person may possess it; or

 (c)  other than a place where it may be possessed under the Firearms Act .

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (3)  Subsection (1) does not apply to a person who possesses a replica firearm.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 93
 1991, c. 40, s. 8
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Unauthorized possession in motor vehicle
 94   (1)  Subject to subsections (3) to (5) and section 98, every person commits an offence who is an occupant of a motor vehicle in which the person knows there is a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, other than a replica firearm, or any prohibited ammunition, unless
 (a)  in the case of a firearm,
 (i)  the person or any other occupant of the motor vehicle is the holder of
 (A)  an authorization or a licence under which the person or other occupant may possess the firearm and, in the case of a prohibited firearm or a restricted firearm, transport the prohibited firearm or restricted firearm, and

 (B)  a registration certificate for the firearm,

 (ii)  the person had reasonable grounds to believe that any other occupant of the motor vehicle was the holder of
 (A)  an authorization or a licence under which that other occupant may possess the firearm and, in the case of a prohibited firearm or a restricted firearm, transport the prohibited firearm or restricted firearm, and

 (B)  a registration certificate for the firearm, or

 (iii)  the person had reasonable grounds to believe that any other occupant of the motor vehicle was a person who could not be convicted of an offence under this Act by reason of sections 117.07 to 117.1 or any other Act of Parliament; and

 (b)  in the case of a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition,
 (i)  the person or any other occupant of the motor vehicle is the holder of an authorization or a licence under which the person or other occupant may transport the prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device or prohibited ammunition, or

 (ii)  the person had reasonable grounds to believe that any other occupant of the motor vehicle was
 (A)  the holder of an authorization or a licence under which the other occupant may transport the prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device or prohibited ammunition, or

 (B)  a person who could not be convicted of an offence under this Act by reason of sections 117.07 to 117.1 or any other Act of Parliament.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (3)  Subsection (1) does not apply to an occupant of a motor vehicle who, on becoming aware of the presence of the firearm, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device or prohibited ammunition in the motor vehicle, attempted to leave the motor vehicle, to the extent that it was feasible to do so, or actually left the motor vehicle.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (4)  Subsection (1) does not apply to an occupant of a motor vehicle where the occupant or any other occupant of the motor vehicle is a person who came into possession of the firearm, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device or prohibited ammunition by the operation of law.

 Marginal note: Borrowed firearm for sustenance
 (5)  Subsection (1) does not apply to an occupant of a motor vehicle where the occupant or any other occupant of the motor vehicle is a person who possesses a firearm that is neither a prohibited firearm nor a restricted firearm and who is not the holder of a registration certificate for the firearm if the person
 (a)  has borrowed the firearm;

 (b)  is the holder of a licence under which the person may possess it; and

 (c)  is in possession of the firearm to hunt or trap in order to sustain the person or the person’s family.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 94
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Possession of prohibited or restricted firearm with ammunition
 95   (1)  Subject to subsection (3) and section 98, every person commits an offence who, in any place, possesses a loaded prohibited firearm or restricted firearm, or an unloaded prohibited firearm or restricted firearm together with readily accessible ammunition that is capable of being discharged in the firearm, unless the person is the holder of
 (a)  an authorization or a licence under which the person may possess the firearm in that place; and

 (b)  the registration certificate for the firearm.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (3)  Subsection (1) does not apply to a person who is using the firearm under the direct and immediate supervision of another person who is lawfully entitled to possess it and is using the firearm in a manner in which that other person may lawfully use it.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 95
 1991, c. 28, s. 8, c. 40, ss. 9, 37
 1993, c. 25, s. 93
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Possession of weapon obtained by commission of offence
 96   (1)  Subject to subsection (3), every person commits an offence who possesses a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition that the person knows was obtained by the commission in Canada of an offence or by an act or omission anywhere that, if it had occurred in Canada, would have constituted an offence.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (3)  Subsection (1) does not apply to a person who comes into possession of anything referred to in that subsection by the operation of law and who lawfully disposes of it within a reasonable period after acquiring possession of it.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 96
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 97  [Not in force]
 Marginal note: Transitional — licences
 98   (1)  Every person who, immediately before the coming into force of any of subsections 91(1), 92(1), 93(1), 94(1) and 95(1), possessed a firearm without a firearms acquisition certificate because
 (a)  the person possessed the firearm before January 1, 1979, or

 (b)  the firearms acquisition certificate under which the person had acquired the firearm had expired,

 shall be deemed for the purposes of that subsection to be, until January 1, 2001 or such other earlier date as is prescribed, the holder of a licence under which the person may possess the firearm.

 Marginal note: Transitional — licences
 (2)  Every person who, immediately before the coming into force of any of subsections 91(1), 92(1), 93(1), 94(1) and 95(1), possessed a firearm and was the holder of a firearms acquisition certificate shall be deemed for the purposes of that subsection to be, until January 1, 2001 or such other earlier date as is prescribed, the holder of a licence under which the person may possess the firearm.

 Marginal note: Transitional — registration certificates
 (3)  Every person who, at any particular time between the coming into force of subsection 91(1), 92(1) or 94(1) and the later of January 1, 1998 and such other date as is prescribed, possesses a firearm that, as of that particular time, is not a prohibited firearm or a restricted firearm shall be deemed for the purposes of that subsection to be, until January 1, 2003 or such other earlier date as is prescribed, the holder of a registration certificate for that firearm.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 98
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 13
 1991, c. 40, s. 11
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Trafficking Offences
 Marginal note: Weapons trafficking
 99   (1)  Every person commits an offence who
 (a)  manufactures or transfers, whether or not for consideration, or

 (b)  offers to do anything referred to in paragraph (a) in respect of

 a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, any ammunition or any prohibited ammunition knowing that the person is not authorized to do so under the Firearms Act or any other Act of Parliament or any regulations made under any Act of Parliament.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 99
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Possession for purpose of weapons trafficking
 100   (1)  Every person commits an offence who possesses a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, any ammunition or any prohibited ammunition for the purpose of
 (a)  transferring it, whether or not for consideration, or

 (b)  offering to transfer it,

 knowing that the person is not authorized to transfer it under the Firearms Act or any other Act of Parliament or any regulations made under any Act of Parliament.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 100
 R.S., 1985, c. 11 (1st Supp.), s. 2, c. 27 (1st Supp.), ss. 14, 203, c. 27 (2nd Supp.), s. 10, c. 1 (4th Supp.), s. 18(F)
 1990, c. 16, s. 2, c. 17, s. 8
 1991, c. 40, s. 12
 1992, c. 51, s. 33
 1995, c. 22, ss. 10, 18(F), c. 39, s. 139
 1996, c. 19, s. 65

 Marginal note: Transfer without authority
 101   (1)  Every person commits an offence who transfers a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, any ammunition or any prohibited ammunition to any person otherwise than under the authority of the Firearms Act or any other Act of Parliament or any regulations made under an Act of Parliament.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 101
 1991, c. 40, s. 13
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Assembling Offence
 Marginal note: Making automatic firearm
 102   (1)  Every person commits an offence who, without lawful excuse, alters a firearm so that it is capable of, or manufactures or assembles any firearm that is capable of, discharging projectiles in rapid succession during one pressure of the trigger.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 102
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 203
 1991, c. 28, s. 9, c. 40, s. 14
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Export and Import Offences
 Marginal note: Importing or exporting knowing it is unauthorized
 103   (1)  Every person commits an offence who imports or exports
 (a)  a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition, or

 (b)  any component or part designed exclusively for use in the manufacture of or assembly into an automatic firearm,

 knowing that the person is not authorized to do so under the Firearms Act or any other Act of Parliament or any regulations made under an Act of Parliament.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year.

 Marginal note: Attorney General of Canada may act
 (3)  Any proceedings in respect of an offence under subsection (1) may be commenced at the instance of the Government of Canada and conducted by or on behalf of that government.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 103
 1991, c. 40, s. 15
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Unauthorized importing or exporting
 104   (1)  Every person commits an offence who imports or exports
 (a)  a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition, or

 (b)  any component or part designed exclusively for use in the manufacture of or assembly into an automatic firearm,

 otherwise than under the authority of the Firearms Act or any other Act of Parliament or any regulations made under an Act of Parliament.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Attorney General of Canada may act
 (3)  Any proceedings in respect of an offence under subsection (1) may be commenced at the instance of the Government of Canada and conducted by or on behalf of that government.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 104
 1991, c. 40, s. 16
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Offences relating to Lost, Destroyed or Defaced Weapons, etc.
 Marginal note: Losing or finding
 105   (1)  Every person commits an offence who
 (a)  having lost a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, any prohibited ammunition, an authorization, a licence or a registration certificate, or having had it stolen from the person’s possession, does not with reasonable despatch report the loss to a peace officer, to a firearms officer or a chief firearms officer; or

 (b)  on finding a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition that the person has reasonable grounds to believe has been lost or abandoned, does not with reasonable despatch deliver it to a peace officer, a firearms officer or a chief firearms officer or report the finding to a peace officer, a firearms officer or a chief firearms officer.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 105
 1991, c. 28, s. 10, c. 40, ss. 18, 39
 1994, c. 44, s. 7
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Destroying
 106   (1)  Every person commits an offence who
 (a)  after destroying any firearm, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device or prohibited ammunition, or

 (b)  on becoming aware of the destruction of any firearm, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device or prohibited ammunition that was in the person’s possession before its destruction,

 does not with reasonable despatch report the destruction to a peace officer, firearms officer or chief firearms officer.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 106
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 203
 1991, c. 40, s. 19
 1995, c. 22, s. 10, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: False statements
 107   (1)  Every person commits an offence who knowingly makes, before a peace officer, firearms officer or chief firearms officer, a false report or statement concerning the loss, theft or destruction of a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, any prohibited ammunition, an authorization, a licence or a registration certificate.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Definition of report or statement
 (3)  In this section, report or statement means an assertion of fact, opinion, belief or knowledge, whether material or not and whether admissible or not.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 107
 1991, c. 40, s. 20
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Tampering with serial number
 108   (1)  Every person commits an offence who, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on the person,
 (a)  alters, defaces or removes a serial number on a firearm; or

 (b)  possesses a firearm knowing that the serial number on it has been altered, defaced or removed.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (3)  No person is guilty of an offence under paragraph (1)(b) by reason only of possessing a firearm the serial number on which has been altered, defaced or removed, where that serial number has been replaced and a registration certificate in respect of the firearm has been issued setting out a new serial number for the firearm.

 Marginal note: Evidence
 (4)  In proceedings for an offence under subsection (1), evidence that a person possesses a firearm the serial number on which has been wholly or partially obliterated otherwise than through normal use over time is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof that the person possesses the firearm knowing that the serial number on it has been altered, defaced or removed.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 108
 1991, c. 40, s. 20
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Prohibition Orders
 Marginal note: Mandatory prohibition order
 109   (1)  Where a person is convicted, or discharged under section 730, of
 (a)  an indictable offence in the commission of which violence against a person was used, threatened or attempted and for which the person may be sentenced to imprisonment for ten years or more,

 (b)  an offence under subsection 85(1) (using firearm in commission of offence), subsection 85(2) (using imitation firearm in commission of offence), 95(1) (possession of prohibited or restricted firearm with ammunition), 99(1) (weapons trafficking), 100(1) (possession for purpose of weapons trafficking), 102(1) (making automatic firearm), 103(1) (importing or exporting knowing it is unauthorized) or section 264 (criminal harassment),

 (c)  an offence relating to the contravention of subsection 5(1) or (2), 6(1) or (2) or 7(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act , or

 (d)  an offence that involves, or the subject-matter of which is, a firearm, a cross-bow, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, any ammunition, any prohibited ammunition or an explosive substance and, at the time of the offence, the person was prohibited by any order made under this Act or any other Act of Parliament from possessing any such thing,

 the court that sentences the person or directs that the person be discharged, as the case may be, shall, in addition to any other punishment that may be imposed for that offence or any other condition prescribed in the order of discharge, make an order prohibiting the person from possessing any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition and explosive substance during the period specified in the order as determined in accordance with subsection (2) or (3), as the case may be.

 Marginal note: Duration of prohibition order — first offence
 (2)  An order made under subsection (1) shall, in the case of a first conviction for or discharge from the offence to which the order relates, prohibit the person from possessing
 (a)  any firearm, other than a prohibited firearm or restricted firearm, and any crossbow, restricted weapon, ammunition and explosive substance during the period that
 (i)  begins on the day on which the order is made, and

 (ii)  ends not earlier than ten years after the person’s release from imprisonment after conviction for the offence or, if the person is not then imprisoned or subject to imprisonment, after the person’s conviction for or discharge from the offence; and

 (b)  any prohibited firearm, restricted firearm, prohibited weapon, prohibited device and prohibited ammunition for life.

 Marginal note: Duration of prohibition order — subsequent offences
 (3)  An order made under subsection (1) shall, in any case other than a case described in subsection (2), prohibit the person from possessing any firearm, cross-bow, restricted weapon, ammunition and explosive substance for life.

 Definition of release from imprisonment
 (4)  In subparagraph (2)(a)(ii), release from imprisonment means release from confinement by reason of expiration of sentence, commencement of statutory release or grant of parole.

 Marginal note: Application of ss. 113 to 117
 (5)  Sections 113 to 117 apply in respect of every order made under subsection (1).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 109
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 185(F)
 1991, c. 40, s. 21
 1995, c. 39, ss. 139, 190
 1996, c. 19, s. 65.1
 2003, c. 8, s. 4

 Marginal note: Discretionary prohibition order
 110   (1)  Where a person is convicted, or discharged under section 730, of
 (a)  an offence, other than an offence referred to in any of paragraphs 109(1)(a), (b) and (c), in the commission of which violence against a person was used, threatened or attempted, or

 (b)  an offence that involves, or the subject-matter of which is, a firearm, a cross-bow, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or an explosive substance and, at the time of the offence, the person was not prohibited by any order made under this Act or any other Act of Parliament from possessing any such thing,

 the court that sentences the person or directs that the person be discharged, as the case may be, shall, in addition to any other punishment that may be imposed for that offence or any other condition prescribed in the order of discharge, consider whether it is desirable, in the interests of the safety of the person or of any other person, to make an order prohibiting the person from possessing any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance, or all such things, and where the court decides that it is so desirable, the court shall so order.

 Marginal note: Duration of prohibition order
 (2)  An order made under subsection (1) against a person begins on the day on which the order is made and ends not later than ten years after the person’s release from imprisonment after conviction for the offence to which the order relates or, if the person is not then imprisoned or subject to imprisonment, after the person’s conviction for or discharge from the offence.

 Marginal note: Reasons
 (3)  Where the court does not make an order under subsection (1), or where the court does make such an order but does not prohibit the possession of everything referred to in that subsection, the court shall include in the record a statement of the court’s reasons for not doing so.

 Definition of release from imprisonment
 (4)  In subsection (2), release from imprisonment means release from confinement by reason of expiration of sentence, commencement of statutory release or grant of parole.

 Marginal note: Application of ss. 113 to 117
 (5)  Sections 113 to 117 apply in respect of every order made under subsection (1).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 110
 1991, c. 40, ss. 23, 40
 1995, c. 39, ss. 139, 190

 Marginal note: Application for prohibition order
 111   (1)  A peace officer, firearms officer or chief firearms officer may apply to a provincial court judge for an order prohibiting a person from possessing any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance, or all such things, where the peace officer, firearms officer or chief firearms officer believes on reasonable grounds that it is not desirable in the interests of the safety of the person against whom the order is sought or of any other person that the person against whom the order is sought should possess any such thing.

 Marginal note: Date for hearing and notice
 (2)  On receipt of an application made under subsection (1), the provincial court judge shall fix a date for the hearing of the application and direct that notice of the hearing be given, in such manner as the provincial court judge may specify, to the person against whom the order is sought.

 Marginal note: Hearing of application
 (3)  Subject to subsection (4), at the hearing of an application made under subsection (1), the provincial court judge shall hear all relevant evidence presented by or on behalf of the applicant and the person against whom the order is sought.

 Marginal note: Where hearing may proceed ex parte
 (4)  A provincial court judge may proceed ex parte to hear and determine an application made under subsection (1) in the absence of the person against whom the order is sought in the same circumstances as those in which a summary conviction court may, under Part XXVII, proceed with a trial in the absence of the defendant.

 Marginal note: Prohibition order
 (5)  Where, at the conclusion of a hearing of an application made under subsection (1), the provincial court judge is satisfied that the circumstances referred to in that subsection exist, the provincial court judge shall make an order prohibiting the person from possessing any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance, or all such things, for such period, not exceeding five years, as is specified in the order, beginning on the day on which the order is made.

 Marginal note: Reasons
 (6)  Where a provincial court judge does not make an order under subsection (1), or where a provincial court judge does make such an order but does not prohibit the possession of everything referred to in that subsection, the provincial court judge shall include in the record a statement of the court’s reasons.

 Marginal note: Application of ss. 113 to 117
 (7)  Sections 113 to 117 apply in respect of every order made under subsection (5).

 Marginal note: Appeal by person or Attorney General
 (8)  Where a provincial court judge makes an order under subsection (5), the person to whom the order relates, or the Attorney General, may appeal to the superior court against the order.

 Marginal note: Appeal by Attorney General
 (9)  Where a provincial court judge does not make an order under subsection (5), the Attorney General may appeal to the superior court against the decision not to make an order.

 Marginal note: Application of Part XXVII to appeals
 (10)  The provisions of Part XXVII, except sections 785 to 812, 816 to 819 and 829 to 838, apply in respect of an appeal made under subsection (8) or (9), with such modifications as the circumstances require and as if each reference in that Part to the appeal court were a reference to the superior court.

 Definition of provincial court judge
 (11)  In this section and sections 112, 117.011 and 117.012, provincial court judge means a provincial court judge having jurisdiction in the territorial division where the person against whom the application for an order was brought resides.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 111
 1991, c. 40, s. 24
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Revocation of prohibition order under s. 111(5)
 112  A provincial court judge may, on application by the person against whom an order is made under subsection 111(5), revoke the order if satisfied that the circumstances for which it was made have ceased to exist.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 112
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 203
 1991, c. 40, s. 26
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Lifting of prohibition order for sustenance or employment
 113   (1)  Where a person who is or will be a person against whom a prohibition order is made establishes to the satisfaction of a competent authority that
 (a)  the person needs a firearm or restricted weapon to hunt or trap in order to sustain the person or the person’s family, or

 (b)  a prohibition order against the person would constitute a virtual prohibition against employment in the only vocation open to the person,

 the competent authority may, notwithstanding that the person is or will be subject to a prohibition order, make an order authorizing a chief firearms officer or the Registrar to issue, in accordance with such terms and conditions as the competent authority considers appropriate, an authorization, a licence or a registration certificate, as the case may be, to the person for sustenance or employment purposes.

 Marginal note: Factors
 (2)  A competent authority may make an order under subsection (1) only after taking the following factors into account:
 (a)  the criminal record, if any, of the person;

 (b)  the nature and circumstances of the offence, if any, in respect of which the prohibition order was or will be made; and

 (c)  the safety of the person and of other persons.

 Marginal note: Effect of order
 (3)  Where an order is made under subsection (1),
 (a)  an authorization, a licence or a registration certificate may not be denied to the person in respect of whom the order was made solely on the basis of a prohibition order against the person or the commission of an offence in respect of which a prohibition order was made against the person; and

 (b)  an authorization and a licence may, for the duration of the order, be issued to the person in respect of whom the order was made only for sustenance or employment purposes and, where the order sets out terms and conditions, only in accordance with those terms and conditions, but, for greater certainty, the authorization or licence may also be subject to terms and conditions set by the chief firearms officer that are not inconsistent with the purpose for which it is issued and any terms and conditions set out in the order.

 Marginal note: When order can be made
 (4)  For greater certainty, an order under subsection (1) may be made during proceedings for an order under subsection 109(1), 110(1), 111(5), 117.05(4) or 515(2), paragraph 732.1(3)(d) or subsection 810(3).

 Meaning of competent authority
 (5)  In this section, competent authority means the competent authority that made or has jurisdiction to make the prohibition order.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 113
 1991, c. 40, s. 27(E)
 1995, c. 22, s. 10, c. 39, ss. 139, 190

 Marginal note: Requirement to surrender
 114  A competent authority that makes a prohibition order against a person may, in the order, require the person to surrender to a peace officer, a firearms officer or a chief firearms officer
 (a)  any thing the possession of which is prohibited by the order that is in the possession of the person on the commencement of the order, and

 (b)  every authorization, licence and registration certificate relating to any thing the possession of which is prohibited by the order that is held by the person on the commencement of the order,

 and where the competent authority does so, it shall specify in the order a reasonable period for surrendering such things and documents and during which section 117.01 does not apply to that person.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 114
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 203
 1995, c. 22, s. 10, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Forfeiture
 115   (1)  Unless a prohibition order against a person specifies otherwise, every thing the possession of which is prohibited by the order that, on the commencement of the order, is in the possession of the person is forfeited to Her Majesty.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (1.1)  Subsection (1) does not apply in respect of an order made under section 515.

 Marginal note: Disposal
 (2)  Every thing forfeited to Her Majesty under subsection (1) shall be disposed of or otherwise dealt with as the Attorney General directs.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 115
 1995, c. 39, s. 139
 2003, c. 8, s. 5

 Marginal note: Authorizations revoked or amended
 116   (1)  Subject to subsection (2), every authorization, licence and registration certificate relating to any thing the possession of which is prohibited by a prohibition order and issued to a person against whom the prohibition order is made is, on the commencement of the prohibition order, revoked, or amended, as the case may be, to the extent of the prohibitions in the order.

 Marginal note: Duration of revocation or amendment — orders under section 515
 (2)  An authorization, a licence and a registration certificate relating to a thing the possession of which is prohibited by an order made under section 515 is revoked, or amended, as the case may be, only in respect of the period during which the order is in force.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 116
 1991, c. 28, s. 11, c. 40, ss. 28, 41
 1995, c. 39, s. 139
 2003, c. 8, s. 6

 Marginal note: Return to owner
 117  Where the competent authority that makes a prohibition order or that would have had jurisdiction to make the order is, on application for an order under this section, satisfied that a person, other than the person against whom a prohibition order was or will be made,
 (a)  is the owner of any thing that is or may be forfeited to Her Majesty under subsection 115(1) and is lawfully entitled to possess it, and

 (b)  in the case of a prohibition order under subsection 109(1) or 110(1), had no reasonable grounds to believe that the thing would or might be used in the commission of the offence in respect of which the prohibition order was made,

 the competent authority shall order that the thing be returned to the owner or the proceeds of any sale of the thing be paid to that owner or, if the thing was destroyed, that an amount equal to the value of the thing be paid to the owner.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 117
 1991, c. 40, s. 29
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Possession contrary to order
 117.01   (1)  Subject to subsection (4), every person commits an offence who possesses a firearm, a cross-bow, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, any ammunition, any prohibited ammunition or an explosive substance while the person is prohibited from doing so by any order made under this Act or any other Act of Parliament.

 Marginal note: Failure to surrender authorization, etc.
 (2)  Every person commits an offence who wilfully fails to surrender to a peace officer, a firearms officer or a chief firearms officer any authorization, licence or registration certificate held by the person when the person is required to do so by any order made under this Act or any other Act of Parliament.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) or (2)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (4)  Subsection (1) does not apply to a person who possessed a firearm in accordance with an authorization or licence issued to the person as the result of an order made under subsection 113(1).

 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Limitations on Access
 Marginal note: Application for order
 117.011   (1)  A peace officer, firearms officer or chief firearms officer may apply to a provincial court judge for an order under this section where the peace officer, firearms officer or chief firearms officer believes on reasonable grounds that
 (a)  the person against whom the order is sought cohabits with, or is an associate of, another person who is prohibited by any order made under this Act or any other Act of Parliament from possessing any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance, or all such things; and

 (b)  the other person would or might have access to any such thing that is in the possession of the person against whom the order is sought.

 Marginal note: Date for hearing and notice
 (2)  On receipt of an application made under subsection (1), the provincial court judge shall fix a date for the hearing of the application and direct that notice of the hearing be given, in such manner as the provincial court judge may specify, to the person against whom the order is sought.

 Marginal note: Hearing of application
 (3)  Subject to subsection (4), at the hearing of an application made under subsection (1), the provincial court judge shall hear all relevant evidence presented by or on behalf of the applicant and the person against whom the order is sought.

 Marginal note: Where hearing may proceed ex parte
 (4)  A provincial court judge may proceed ex parte to hear and determine an application made under subsection (1) in the absence of the person against whom the order is sought in the same circumstances as those in which a summary conviction court may, under Part XXVII, proceed with a trial in the absence of the defendant.

 Marginal note: Order
 (5)  Where, at the conclusion of a hearing of an application made under subsection (1), the provincial court judge is satisfied that the circumstances referred to in that subsection exist, the provincial court judge shall make an order in respect of the person against whom the order was sought imposing such terms and conditions on the person’s use and possession of anything referred to in subsection (1) as the provincial court judge considers appropriate.

 Marginal note: Terms and conditions
 (6)  In determining terms and conditions under subsection (5), the provincial court judge shall impose terms and conditions that are the least intrusive as possible, bearing in mind the purpose of the order.

 Marginal note: Appeal by person or Attorney General
 (7)  Where a provincial court judge makes an order under subsection (5), the person to whom the order relates, or the Attorney General, may appeal to the superior court against the order.

 Marginal note: Appeal by Attorney General
 (8)  Where a provincial court judge does not make an order under subsection (5), the Attorney General may appeal to the superior court against the decision not to make an order.

 Marginal note: Application of Part XXVII to appeals
 (9)  The provisions of Part XXVII, except sections 785 to 812, 816 to 819 and 829 to 838, apply in respect of an appeal made under subsection (7) or (8), with such modifications as the circumstances require and as if each reference in that Part to the appeal court were a reference to the superior court.

 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Revocation of order under s. 117.011
 117.012  A provincial court judge may, on application by the person against whom an order is made under subsection 117.011(5), revoke the order if satisfied that the circumstances for which it was made have ceased to exist.
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Search and Seizure
 Marginal note: Search and seizure without warrant where offence committed
 117.02   (1)  Where a peace officer believes on reasonable grounds
 (a)  that a weapon, an imitation firearm, a prohibited device, any ammunition, any prohibited ammunition or an explosive substance was used in the commission of an offence, or

 (b)  that an offence is being committed, or has been committed, under any provision of this Act that involves, or the subject-matter of which is, a firearm, an imitation firearm, a cross-bow, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or an explosive substance,

 and evidence of the offence is likely to be found on a person, in a vehicle or in any place or premises other than a dwelling-house, the peace officer may, where the conditions for obtaining a warrant exist but, by reason of exigent circumstances, it would not be practicable to obtain a warrant, search, without warrant, the person, vehicle, place or premises, and seize any thing by means of or in relation to which that peace officer believes on reasonable grounds the offence is being committed or has been committed.

 Marginal note: Disposition of seized things
 (2)  Any thing seized pursuant to subsection (1) shall be dealt with in accordance with sections 490 and 491.

 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Seizure on failure to produce authorization
 117.03   (1)  Notwithstanding section 117.02, a peace officer who finds
 (a)  a person in possession of a firearm who fails, on demand, to produce, for inspection by the peace officer, an authorization or a licence under which the person may lawfully possess the firearm and a registration certificate for the firearm, or

 (b)  a person in possession of a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition who fails, on demand, to produce, for inspection by the peace officer, an authorization or a licence under which the person may lawfully possess it,

 may seize the firearm, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device or prohibited ammunition unless its possession by the person in the circumstances in which it is found is authorized by any provision of this Part, or the person is under the direct and immediate supervision of another person who may lawfully possess it.

 Marginal note: Return of seized thing on production of authorization
 (2)  Where a person from whom any thing is seized pursuant to subsection (1) claims the thing within fourteen days after the seizure and produces for inspection by the peace officer by whom it was seized, or any other peace officer having custody of it,
 (a)  an authorization or a licence under which the person is lawfully entitled to possess it, and

 (b)  in the case of a firearm, a registration certificate for the firearm,

 the thing shall forthwith be returned to that person.

 Marginal note: Forfeiture of seized thing
 (3)  Where any thing seized pursuant to subsection (1) is not claimed and returned as and when provided by subsection (2), a peace officer shall forthwith take the thing before a provincial court judge, who may, after affording the person from whom it was seized or its owner, if known, an opportunity to establish that the person is lawfully entitled to possess it, declare it to be forfeited to Her Majesty, to be disposed of or otherwise dealt with as the Attorney General directs.

 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Application for warrant to search and seize
 117.04   (1)  Where, pursuant to an application made by a peace officer with respect to any person, a justice is satisfied by information on oath that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person possesses a weapon, a prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or an explosive substance in a building, receptacle or place and that it is not desirable in the interests of the safety of the person, or of any other person, for the person to possess the weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance, the justice may issue a warrant authorizing a peace officer to search the building, receptacle or place and seize any such thing, and any authorization, licence or registration certificate relating to any such thing, that is held by or in the possession of the person.

 Marginal note: Search and seizure without warrant
 (2)  Where, with respect to any person, a peace officer is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that it is not desirable, in the interests of the safety of the person or any other person, for the person to possess any weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance, the peace officer may, where the grounds for obtaining a warrant under subsection (1) exist but, by reason of a possible danger to the safety of that person or any other person, it would not be practicable to obtain a warrant, search for and seize any such thing, and any authorization, licence or registration certificate relating to any such thing, that is held by or in the possession of the person.

 Marginal note: Return to justice
 (3)  A peace officer who executes a warrant referred to in subsection (1) or who conducts a search without a warrant under subsection (2) shall forthwith make a return to the justice who issued the warrant or, if no warrant was issued, to a justice who might otherwise have issued a warrant, showing
 (a)  in the case of an execution of a warrant, the things or documents, if any, seized and the date of execution of the warrant; and

 (b)  in the case of a search conducted without a warrant, the grounds on which it was concluded that the peace officer was entitled to conduct the search, and the things or documents, if any, seized.

 Marginal note: Authorizations, etc., revoked
 (4)  Where a peace officer who seizes any thing under subsection (1) or (2) is unable at the time of the seizure to seize an authorization or a licence under which the person from whom the thing was seized may possess the thing and, in the case of a seized firearm, a registration certificate for the firearm, every authorization, licence and registration certificate held by the person is, as at the time of the seizure, revoked.

 1995, c. 39, s. 139
 2004, c. 12, s. 3

 Marginal note: Application for disposition
 117.05   (1)  Where any thing or document has been seized under subsection 117.04(1) or (2), the justice who issued the warrant authorizing the seizure or, if no warrant was issued, a justice who might otherwise have issued a warrant, shall, on application for an order for the disposition of the thing or document so seized made by a peace officer within thirty days after the date of execution of the warrant or of the seizure without a warrant, as the case may be, fix a date for the hearing of the application and direct that notice of the hearing be given to such persons or in such manner as the justice may specify.

 Marginal note: Ex parte hearing
 (2)  A justice may proceed ex parte to hear and determine an application made under subsection (1) in the absence of the person from whom the thing or document was seized in the same circumstances as those in which a summary conviction court may, under Part XXVII, proceed with a trial in the absence of the defendant.

 Marginal note: Hearing of application
 (3)  At the hearing of an application made under subsection (1), the justice shall hear all relevant evidence, including evidence respecting the value of the thing in respect of which the application was made.

 Marginal note: Forfeiture and prohibition order on finding
 (4)  Where, following the hearing of an application made under subsection (1), the justice finds that it is not desirable in the interests of the safety of the person from whom the thing was seized or of any other person that the person should possess any weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition and explosive substance, or any such thing, the justice shall
 (a)  order that any thing seized be forfeited to Her Majesty or be otherwise disposed of; and

 (b)  where the justice is satisfied that the circumstances warrant such an action, order that the possession by that person of any weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition and explosive substance, or of any such thing, be prohibited during any period, not exceeding five years, that is specified in the order, beginning on the making of the order.

 Marginal note: Reasons
 (5)  Where a justice does not make an order under subsection (4), or where a justice does make such an order but does not prohibit the possession of all of the things referred to in that subsection, the justice shall include in the record a statement of the justice’s reasons.

 Marginal note: Application of ss. 113 to 117
 (6)  Sections 113 to 117 apply in respect of every order made under subsection (4).

 Marginal note: Appeal by person
 (7)  Where a justice makes an order under subsection (4) in respect of a person, or in respect of any thing that was seized from a person, the person may appeal to the superior court against the order.

 Marginal note: Appeal by Attorney General
 (8)  Where a justice does not make a finding as described in subsection (4) following the hearing of an application under subsection (1), or makes the finding but does not make an order to the effect described in paragraph (4)(b), the Attorney General may appeal to the superior court against the failure to make the finding or to make an order to the effect so described.

 Marginal note: Application of Part XXVII to appeals
 (9)  The provisions of Part XXVII, except sections 785 to 812, 816 to 819 and 829 to 838, apply in respect of an appeal made under subsection (7) or (8) with such modifications as the circumstances require and as if each reference in that Part to the appeal court were a reference to the superior court.

 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Where no finding or application
 117.06   (1)  Any thing or document seized pursuant to subsection 117.04(1) or (2) shall be returned to the person from whom it was seized if
 (a)  no application is made under subsection 117.05(1) within thirty days after the date of execution of the warrant or of the seizure without a warrant, as the case may be; or

 (b)  an application is made under subsection 117.05(1) within the period referred to in paragraph (a), and the justice does not make a finding as described in subsection 117.05(4).

 Marginal note: Restoration of authorizations
 (2)  Where, pursuant to subsection (1), any thing is returned to the person from whom it was seized and an authorization, a licence or a registration certificate, as the case may be, is revoked pursuant to subsection 117.04(4), the justice referred to in paragraph (1)(b) may order that the revocation be reversed and that the authorization, licence or registration certificate be restored.

 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Exempted Persons
 Marginal note: Public officers
 117.07   (1)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, but subject to section 117.1, no public officer is guilty of an offence under this Act or the Firearms Act by reason only that the public officer
 (a)  possesses a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, any prohibited ammunition or an explosive substance in the course of or for the purpose of the public officer’s duties or employment;

 (b)  manufactures or transfers, or offers to manufacture or transfer, a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, any ammunition or any prohibited ammunition in the course of the public officer’s duties or employment;

 (c)  exports or imports a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition in the course of the public officer’s duties or employment;

 (d)  exports or imports a component or part designed exclusively for use in the manufacture of or assembly into an automatic firearm in the course of the public officer’s duties or employment;

 (e)  in the course of the public officer’s duties or employment, alters a firearm so that it is capable of, or manufactures or assembles any firearm with intent to produce a firearm that is capable of, discharging projectiles in rapid succession during one pressure of the trigger;

 (f)  fails to report the loss, theft or finding of any firearm, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance that occurs in the course of the public officer’s duties or employment or the destruction of any such thing in the course of the public officer’s duties or employment; or

 (g)  alters a serial number on a firearm in the course of the public officer’s duties or employment.

 Definition of public officer
 (2)  In this section, public officer means
 (a)  a peace officer;

 (b)  a member of the Canadian Forces or of the armed forces of a state other than Canada who is attached or seconded to any of the Canadian Forces;

 (c)  an operator of a museum established by the Chief of the Defence Staff or a person employed in any such museum;

 (d)  a member of a cadet organization under the control and supervision of the Canadian Forces;

 (e)  a person training to become a police officer or a peace officer under the control and supervision of
 (i)  a police force, or

 (ii)  a police academy or similar institution designated by the Attorney General of Canada or the lieutenant governor in council of a province;

 (f)  a member of a visiting force, within the meaning of section 2 of the Visiting Forces Act , who is authorized under paragraph 14(a) of that Act to possess and carry explosives, ammunition and firearms;

 (g)  a person, or member of a class of persons, employed in the federal public administration or by the government of a province or municipality who is prescribed to be a public officer; or

 (h)  the Commissioner of Firearms, the Registrar, a chief firearms officer, any firearms officer and any person designated under section 100 of the Firearms Act .

 1995, c. 39, s. 139
 2003, c. 8, s. 7, c. 22, s. 224(E)

 Marginal note: Individuals acting for police force, Canadian Forces and visiting forces
 117.08  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, but subject to section 117.1, no individual is guilty of an offence under this Act or the Firearms Act by reason only that the individual
 (a)  possesses a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, any prohibited ammunition or an explosive substance,

 (b)  manufactures or transfers, or offers to manufacture or transfer, a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, any ammunition or any prohibited ammunition,

 (c)  exports or imports a firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition,

 (d)  exports or imports a component or part designed exclusively for use in the manufacture of or assembly into an automatic firearm,

 (e)  alters a firearm so that it is capable of, or manufactures or assembles any firearm with intent to produce a firearm that is capable of, discharging projectiles in rapid succession during one pressure of the trigger,

 (f)  fails to report the loss, theft or finding of any firearm, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance or the destruction of any such thing, or

 (g)  alters a serial number on a firearm,

 if the individual does so on behalf of, and under the authority of, a police force, the Canadian Forces, a visiting force, within the meaning of section 2 of the Visiting Forces Act , or a department of the Government of Canada or of a province.
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Employees of business with licence
 117.09   (1)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, but subject to section 117.1, no individual who is the holder of a licence to possess and acquire restricted firearms and who is employed by a business as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Firearms Act that itself is the holder of a licence that authorizes the business to carry out specified activities in relation to prohibited firearms, prohibited weapons, prohibited devices or prohibited ammunition is guilty of an offence under this Act or the Firearms Act by reason only that the individual, in the course of the individual’s duties or employment in relation to those specified activities,
 (a)  possesses a prohibited firearm, a prohibited weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition;

 (b)  manufactures or transfers, or offers to manufacture or transfer, a prohibited weapon, a prohibited device or any prohibited ammunition;

 (c)  alters a firearm so that it is capable of, or manufactures or assembles any firearm with intent to produce a firearm that is capable of, discharging projectiles in rapid succession during one pressure of the trigger; or

 (d)  alters a serial number on a firearm.

 Marginal note: Employees of business with licence
 (2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, but subject to section 117.1, no individual who is employed by a business as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Firearms Act that itself is the holder of a licence is guilty of an offence under this Act or the Firearms Act by reason only that the individual, in the course of the individual’s duties or employment, possesses, manufactures or transfers, or offers to manufacture or transfer, a partially manufactured barrelled weapon that, in its unfinished state, is not a barrelled weapon from which any shot, bullet or other projectile can be discharged and that is capable of causing serious bodily injury or death to a person.

 Marginal note: Employees of carriers
 (3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, but subject to section 117.1, no individual who is employed by a carrier, as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Firearms Act , is guilty of an offence under this Act or that Act by reason only that the individual, in the course of the individual’s duties or employment, possesses any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition or prohibited ammunition or transfers, or offers to transfer any such thing.

 Marginal note: Employees of museums handling functioning imitation antique firearm
 (4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, but subject to section 117.1, no individual who is employed by a museum as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Firearms Act that itself is the holder of a licence is guilty of an offence under this Act or the Firearms Act by reason only that the individual, in the course of the individual’s duties or employment, possesses or transfers a firearm that is designed or intended to exactly resemble, or to resemble with near precision, an antique firearm if the individual has been trained to handle and use such a firearm.

 Marginal note: Employees of museums handling firearms generally
 (5)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, but subject to section 117.1, no individual who is employed by a museum as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Firearms Act that itself is the holder of a licence is guilty of an offence under this Act or the Firearms Act by reason only that the individual possesses or transfers a firearm in the course of the individual’s duties or employment if the individual is designated, by name, by a provincial minister within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Firearms Act .

 Marginal note: Public safety
 (6)  A provincial minister shall not designate an individual for the purpose of subsection (5) where it is not desirable, in the interests of the safety of any person, to designate the individual.

 Marginal note: Conditions
 (7)  A provincial minister may attach to a designation referred to in subsection (5) any reasonable condition that the provincial minister considers desirable in the particular circumstances and in the interests of the safety of any person.

 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Restriction
 117.1  Sections 117.07 to 117.09 do not apply if the public officer or the individual is subject to a prohibition order and acts contrary to that order or to an authorization or a licence issued under the authority of an order made under subsection 113(1).
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 General
 Marginal note: Onus on the accused
 117.11  Where, in any proceedings for an offence under any of sections 89, 90, 91, 93, 97, 101, 104 and 105, any question arises as to whether a person is the holder of an authorization, a licence or a registration certificate, the onus is on the accused to prove that the person is the holder of the authorization, licence or registration certificate.
 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Authorizations, etc., as evidence
 117.12   (1)  In any proceedings under this Act or any other Act of Parliament, a document purporting to be an authorization, a licence or a registration certificate is evidence of the statements contained therein.

 Marginal note: Certified copies
 (2)  In any proceedings under this Act or any other Act of Parliament, a copy of any authorization, licence or registration certificate is, if certified as a true copy by the Registrar or a chief firearms officer, admissible in evidence and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, has the same probative force as the authorization, licence or registration certificate would have had if it had been proved in the ordinary way.

 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Certificate of analyst
 117.13   (1)  A certificate purporting to be signed by an analyst stating that the analyst has analyzed any weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance, or any part or component of such a thing, and stating the results of the analysis is evidence in any proceedings in relation to any of those things under this Act or under section 19 of the Export and Import Permits Act in relation to subsection 15(2) of that Act without proof of the signature or official character of the person appearing to have signed the certificate.

 Marginal note: Attendance of analyst
 (2)  The party against whom a certificate of an analyst is produced may, with leave of the court, require the attendance of the analyst for the purposes of cross-examination.

 Marginal note: Notice of intention to produce certificate
 (3)  No certificate of an analyst may be admitted in evidence unless the party intending to produce it has, before the trial, given to the party against whom it is intended to be produced reasonable notice of that intention together with a copy of the certificate.

 Marginal note: Proof of service
 (4)  For the purposes of this Act, service of a certificate of an analyst may be proved by oral evidence given under oath by, or by the affidavit or solemn declaration of, the person claiming to have served it.

 Marginal note: Attendance for examination
 (5)  Notwithstanding subsection (4), the court may require the person who appears to have signed an affidavit or solemn declaration referred to in that subsection to appear before it for examination or cross-examination in respect of the issue of proof of service.

 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Amnesty period
 117.14   (1)  The Governor in Council may, by order, declare for any purpose referred to in subsection (2) any period as an amnesty period with respect to any weapon, prohibited device, prohibited ammunition, explosive substance or component or part designed exclusively for use in the manufacture of or assembly into an automatic firearm.

 Marginal note: Purposes of amnesty period
 (2)  An order made under subsection (1) may declare an amnesty period for the purpose of
 (a)  permitting any person in possession of any thing to which the order relates to do anything provided in the order, including, without restricting the generality of the foregoing, delivering the thing to a peace officer, a firearms officer or a chief firearms officer, registering it, destroying it or otherwise disposing of it; or

 (b)  permitting alterations to be made to any prohibited firearm, prohibited weapon, prohibited device or prohibited ammunition to which the order relates so that it no longer qualifies as a prohibited firearm, a prohibited weapon, a prohibited device or prohibited ammunition, as the case may be.

 Marginal note: Reliance on amnesty period
 (3)  No person who, during an amnesty period declared by an order made under subsection (1) and for a purpose described in the order, does anything provided for in the order, is, by reason only of the fact that the person did that thing, guilty of an offence under this Part.

 Marginal note: Proceedings are a nullity
 (4)  Any proceedings taken under this Part against any person for anything done by the person in reliance of this section are a nullity.

 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 Marginal note: Regulations
 117.15   (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the Governor in Council may make regulations prescribing anything that by this Part is to be or may be prescribed.

 Marginal note: Restriction
 (2)  In making regulations, the Governor in Council may not prescribe any thing to be a prohibited firearm, a restricted firearm, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device or prohibited ammunition if, in the opinion of the Governor in Council, the thing to be prescribed is reasonable for use in Canada for hunting or sporting purposes.

 1995, c. 39, s. 139

 PART IV Offences Against the Administration of Law and Justice
 Interpretation
 Marginal note: Definitions
 118  In this Part,
 evidence evidence or statement  means an assertion of fact, opinion, belief or knowledge, whether material or not and whether admissible or not; ( témoignage , déposition ou déclaration )
 government government  means
 (a)  the Government of Canada,

 (b)  the government of a province, or

 (c)  Her Majesty in right of Canada or a province; ( gouvernement )

 judicial proceeding judicial proceeding  means a proceeding
 (a)  in or under the authority of a court of justice,

 (b)  before the Senate or House of Commons or a committee of the Senate or House of Commons, or before a legislative council, legislative assembly or house of assembly or a committee thereof that is authorized by law to administer an oath,

 (c)  before a court, judge, justice, provincial court judge or coroner,

 (d)  before an arbitrator or umpire, or a person or body of persons authorized by law to make an inquiry and take evidence therein under oath, or

 (e)  before a tribunal by which a legal right or legal liability may be established,

 whether or not the proceeding is invalid for want of jurisdiction or for any other reason; ( procédure judiciaire )
 office office  includes
 (a)  an office or appointment under the government,

 (b)  a civil or military commission, and

 (c)  a position or an employment in a public department; ( charge ou emploi )

 official official  means a person who
 (a)  holds an office, or

 (b)  is appointed or elected to discharge a public duty; ( fonctionnaire )

 witness witness  means a person who gives evidence orally under oath or by affidavit in a judicial proceeding, whether or not he is competent to be a witness, and includes a child of tender years who gives evidence but does not give it under oath, because, in the opinion of the person presiding, the child does not understand the nature of an oath. ( témoin )
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 118
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), ss. 15, 203
 2007, c. 13, s. 2

 Corruption and Disobedience
 Marginal note: Bribery of judicial officers, etc.
 119   (1)  Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years who
 (a)  being the holder of a judicial office, or being a member of Parliament or of the legislature of a province, directly or indirectly, corruptly accepts, obtains, agrees to accept or attempts to obtain, for themselves or another person, any money, valuable consideration, office, place or employment in respect of anything done or omitted or to be done or omitted by them in their official capacity, or

 (b)  directly or indirectly, corruptly gives or offers to a person mentioned in paragraph (a), or to anyone for the benefit of that person, any money, valuable consideration, office, place or employment in respect of anything done or omitted or to be done or omitted by that person in their official capacity.

 Marginal note: Consent of Attorney General
 (2)  No proceedings against a person who holds a judicial office shall be instituted under this section without the consent in writing of the Attorney General of Canada.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 119
 2007, c. 13, s. 3

 Marginal note: Bribery of officers
 120  Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years who
 (a)  being a justice, police commissioner, peace officer, public officer or officer of a juvenile court, or being employed in the administration of criminal law, directly or indirectly, corruptly accepts, obtains, agrees to accept or attempts to obtain, for themselves or another person, any money, valuable consideration, office, place or employment with intent
 (i)  to interfere with the administration of justice,

 (ii)  to procure or facilitate the commission of an offence, or

 (iii)  to protect from detection or punishment a person who has committed or who intends to commit an offence; or

 (b)  directly or indirectly, corruptly gives or offers to a person mentioned in paragraph (a), or to anyone for the benefit of that person, any money, valuable consideration, office, place or employment with intent that the person should do anything mentioned in subparagraph (a)(i), (ii) or (iii).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 120
 2007, c. 13, s. 4

 Marginal note: Frauds on the government
 121   (1)  Every one commits an offence who
 (a)  directly or indirectly
 (i)  gives, offers or agrees to give or offer to an official or to any member of his family, or to any one for the benefit of an official, or

 (ii)  being an official, demands, accepts or offers or agrees to accept from any person for himself or another person,

 a loan, reward, advantage or benefit of any kind as consideration for cooperation, assistance, exercise of influence or an act or omission in connection with
 (iii)  the transaction of business with or any matter of business relating to the government, or

 (iv)  a claim against Her Majesty or any benefit that Her Majesty is authorized or is entitled to bestow,

 whether or not, in fact, the official is able to cooperate, render assistance, exercise influence or do or omit to do what is proposed, as the case may be;

 (b)  having dealings of any kind with the government, directly or indirectly pays a commission or reward to or confers an advantage or benefit of any kind on an employee or official of the government with which the dealings take place, or to any member of the employee’s or official’s family, or to anyone for the benefit of the employee or official, with respect to those dealings, unless the person has the consent in writing of the head of the branch of government with which the dealings take place;

 (c)  being an official or employee of the government, directly or indirectly demands, accepts or offers or agrees to accept from a person who has dealings with the government a commission, reward, advantage or benefit of any kind for themselves or another person, unless they have the consent in writing of the head of the branch of government that employs them or of which they are an official;

 (d)  having or pretending to have influence with the government or with a minister of the government or an official, directly or indirectly demands, accepts or offers or agrees to accept, for themselves or another person, a reward, advantage or benefit of any kind as consideration for cooperation, assistance, exercise of influence or an act or omission in connection with
 (i)  anything mentioned in subparagraph (a)(iii) or (iv), or

 (ii)  the appointment of any person, including themselves, to an office;

 (e)  directly or indirectly gives or offers, or agrees to give or offer, to a minister of the government or an official, or to anyone for the benefit of a minister or an official, a reward, advantage or benefit of any kind as consideration for cooperation, assistance, exercise of influence, or an act or omission, by that minister or official, in connection with
 (i)  anything mentioned in subparagraph (a)(iii) or (iv), or

 (ii)  the appointment of any person, including themselves, to an office; or

 (f)  having made a tender to obtain a contract with the government,
 (i)  directly or indirectly gives or offers, or agrees to give or offer, to another person who has made a tender, to a member of that person’s family or to another person for the benefit of that person, a reward, advantage or benefit of any kind as consideration for the withdrawal of the tender of that person, or

 (ii)  directly or indirectly demands, accepts or offers or agrees to accept from another person who has made a tender a reward, advantage or benefit of any kind for themselves or another person as consideration for the withdrawal of their own tender.

 Marginal note: Contractor subscribing to election fund
 (2)  Every one commits an offence who, in order to obtain or retain a contract with the government, or as a term of any such contract, whether express or implied, directly or indirectly subscribes or gives, or agrees to subscribe or give, to any person any valuable consideration
 (a)  for the purpose of promoting the election of a candidate or a class or party of candidates to Parliament or the legislature of a province; or

 (b)  with intent to influence or affect in any way the result of an election conducted for the purpose of electing persons to serve in Parliament or the legislature of a province.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  Every one who commits an offence under this section is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 121
 2007, c. 13, s. 5

 Marginal note: Breach of trust by public officer
 122  Every official who, in connection with the duties of his office, commits fraud or a breach of trust is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, whether or not the fraud or breach of trust would be an offence if it were committed in relation to a private person.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 111

 Marginal note: Municipal corruption
 123   (1)  Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years who directly or indirectly gives, offers or agrees to give or offer to a municipal official or to anyone for the benefit of a municipal official — or, being a municipal official, directly or indirectly demands, accepts or offers or agrees to accept from any person for themselves or another person — a loan, reward, advantage or benefit of any kind as consideration for the official
 (a)  to abstain from voting at a meeting of the municipal council or a committee of the council;

 (b)  to vote in favour of or against a measure, motion or resolution;

 (c)  to aid in procuring or preventing the adoption of a measure, motion or resolution; or

 (d)  to perform or fail to perform an official act.

 Marginal note: Influencing municipal official
 (2)  Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years who influences or attempts to influence a municipal official to do anything mentioned in paragraphs (1)(a) to (d) by
 (a)  suppression of the truth, in the case of a person who is under a duty to disclose the truth;

 (b)  threats or deceit; or

 (c)  any unlawful means.

 Definition of municipal official
 (3)  In this section, municipal official means a member of a municipal council or a person who holds an office under a municipal government.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 123
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 16
 2007, c. 13, s. 6

 Marginal note: Selling or purchasing office
 124  Every one who
 (a)  purports to sell or agrees to sell an appointment to or a resignation from an office, or a consent to any such appointment or resignation, or receives or agrees to receive a reward or profit from the purported sale thereof, or

 (b)  purports to purchase or gives a reward or profit for the purported purchase of any such appointment, resignation or consent, or agrees or promises to do so,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 113

 Marginal note: Influencing or negotiating appointments or dealing in offices
 125  Every one who
 (a)  receives, agrees to receive, gives or procures to be given, directly or indirectly, a reward, advantage or benefit of any kind as consideration for cooperation, assistance or exercise of influence to secure the appointment of any person to an office,

 (b)  solicits, recommends or negotiates in any manner with respect to an appointment to or resignation from an office, in expectation of a direct or indirect reward, advantage or benefit, or

 (c)  keeps without lawful authority, the proof of which lies on him, a place for transacting or negotiating any business relating to
 (i)  the filling of vacancies in offices,

 (ii)  the sale or purchase of offices, or

 (iii)  appointments to or resignations from offices,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 114

 Marginal note: Disobeying a statute
 126   (1)  Every one who, without lawful excuse, contravenes an Act of Parliament by wilfully doing anything that it forbids or by wilfully omitting to do anything that it requires to be done is, unless a punishment is expressly provided by law, guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Attorney General of Canada may act
 (2)  Any proceedings in respect of a contravention of or conspiracy to contravene an Act mentioned in subsection (1), other than this Act, may be instituted at the instance of the Government of Canada and conducted by or on behalf of that Government.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 126
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 185(F)

 Marginal note: Disobeying order of court
 127   (1)  Every one who, without lawful excuse, disobeys a lawful order made by a court of justice or by a person or body of persons authorized by any Act to make or give the order, other than an order for the payment of money, is, unless a punishment or other mode of proceeding is expressly provided by law, guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Attorney General of Canada may act
 (2)  Where the order referred to in subsection (1) was made in proceedings instituted at the instance of the Government of Canada and conducted by or on behalf of that Government, any proceedings in respect of a contravention of or conspiracy to contravene that order may be instituted and conducted in like manner.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 127
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 185(F)
 2005, c. 32, s. 1

 Marginal note: Misconduct of officers executing process
 128  Every peace officer or coroner who, being entrusted with the execution of a process, wilfully
 (a)  misconducts himself in the execution of the process, or

 (b)  makes a false return to the process,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 117

 Marginal note: Offences relating to public or peace officer
 129  Every one who
 (a)  resists or wilfully obstructs a public officer or peace officer in the execution of his duty or any person lawfully acting in aid of such an officer,

 (b)  omits, without reasonable excuse, to assist a public officer or peace officer in the execution of his duty in arresting a person or in preserving the peace, after having reasonable notice that he is required to do so, or

 (c)  resists or wilfully obstructs any person in the lawful execution of a process against lands or goods or in making a lawful distress or seizure,

 is guilty of
 (d)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or

 (e)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 118
 1972, c. 13, s. 7

 Marginal note: Personating peace officer
 130  Every one who
 (a)  falsely represents himself to be a peace officer or a public officer, or

 (b)  not being a peace officer or public officer, uses a badge or article of uniform or equipment in a manner that is likely to cause persons to believe that he is a peace officer or a public officer, as the case may be,

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 119

 Misleading Justice
 Marginal note: Perjury
 131   (1)  Subject to subsection (3), every one commits perjury who, with intent to mislead, makes before a person who is authorized by law to permit it to be made before him a false statement under oath or solemn affirmation, by affidavit, solemn declaration or deposition or orally, knowing that the statement is false.

 Marginal note: Video links, etc.
 (1.1)  Subject to subsection (3), every person who gives evidence under subsection 46(2) of the Canada Evidence Act , or gives evidence or a statement pursuant to an order made under section 22.2 of the Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters Act , commits perjury who, with intent to mislead, makes a false statement knowing that it is false, whether or not the false statement was made under oath or solemn affirmation in accordance with subsection (1), so long as the false statement was made in accordance with any formalities required by the law of the place outside Canada in which the person is virtually present or heard.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (2)  Subsection (1) applies, whether or not a statement referred to in that subsection is made in a judicial proceeding.

 Marginal note: Application
 (3)  Subsections (1) and (1.1) do not apply to a statement referred to in either of those subsections that is made by a person who is not specially permitted, authorized or required by law to make that statement.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 131
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 17
 1999, c. 18, s. 92

 Marginal note: Punishment
 132  Every one who commits perjury is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 132
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 17
 1998, c. 35, s. 119

 Marginal note: Corroboration
 133  No person shall be convicted of an offence under section 132 on the evidence of only one witness unless the evidence of that witness is corroborated in a material particular by evidence that implicates the accused.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 133
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 17

 Marginal note: Idem
 134   (1)  Subject to subsection (2), every one who, not being specially permitted, authorized or required by law to make a statement under oath or solemn affirmation, makes such a statement, by affidavit, solemn declaration or deposition or orally before a person who is authorized by law to permit it to be made before him, knowing that the statement is false, is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Application
 (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to a statement referred to in that subsection that is made in the course of a criminal investigation.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 134
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 17

 135   [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 17]
 Marginal note: Witness giving contradictory evidence
 136   (1)  Every one who, being a witness in a judicial proceeding, gives evidence with respect to any matter of fact or knowledge and who subsequently, in a judicial proceeding, gives evidence that is contrary to his previous evidence is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years, whether or not the prior or later evidence or either is true, but no person shall be convicted under this section unless the court, judge or provincial court judge, as the case may be, is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused, in giving evidence in either of the judicial proceedings, intended to mislead.

 Marginal note: Evidence in specific cases
 (1.1)  Evidence given under section 714.1, 714.2, 714.3 or 714.4 or under subsection 46(2) of the Canada Evidence Act or evidence or a statement given pursuant to an order made under section 22.2 of the Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters Act is deemed to be evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding for the purposes of subsection (1).

 Definition of evidence
 (2)  Notwithstanding the definition evidence in section 118, evidence , for the purposes of this section, does not include evidence that is not material.

 Marginal note: Proof of former trial
 (2.1)  Where a person is charged with an offence under this section, a certificate specifying with reasonable particularity the proceeding in which that person is alleged to have given the evidence in respect of which the offence is charged, is evidence that it was given in a judicial proceeding, without proof of the signature or official character of the person by whom the certificate purports to be signed if it purports to be signed by the clerk of the court or other official having the custody of the record of that proceeding or by his lawful deputy.

 Marginal note: Consent required
 (3)  No proceedings shall be instituted under this section without the consent of the Attorney General.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 136
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), ss. 18, 203
 1999, c. 18, s. 93

 Marginal note: Fabricating evidence
 137  Every one who, with intent to mislead, fabricates anything with intent that it shall be used as evidence in a judicial proceeding, existing or proposed, by any means other than perjury or incitement to perjury is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 125

 Marginal note: Offences relating to affidavits
 138  Every one who
 (a)  signs a writing that purports to be an affidavit or statutory declaration and to have been sworn or declared before him when the writing was not so sworn or declared or when he knows that he has no authority to administer the oath or declaration,

 (b)  uses or offers for use any writing purporting to be an affidavit or statutory declaration that he knows was not sworn or declared, as the case may be, by the affiant or declarant or before a person authorized in that behalf, or

 (c)  signs as affiant or declarant a writing that purports to be an affidavit or statutory declaration and to have been sworn or declared by him, as the case may be, when the writing was not so sworn or declared,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 126

 Marginal note: Obstructing justice
 139   (1)  Every one who wilfully attempts in any manner to obstruct, pervert or defeat the course of justice in a judicial proceeding,
 (a)  by indemnifying or agreeing to indemnify a surety, in any way and either in whole or in part, or

 (b)  where he is a surety, by accepting or agreeing to accept a fee or any form of indemnity whether in whole or in part from or in respect of a person who is released or is to be released from custody,

 is guilty of
 (c)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or

 (d)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (2)  Every one who wilfully attempts in any manner other than a manner described in subsection (1) to obstruct, pervert or defeat the course of justice is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (3)  Without restricting the generality of subsection (2), every one shall be deemed wilfully to attempt to obstruct, pervert or defeat the course of justice who in a judicial proceeding, existing or proposed,
 (a)  dissuades or attempts to dissuade a person by threats, bribes or other corrupt means from giving evidence;

 (b)  influences or attempts to influence by threats, bribes or other corrupt means a person in his conduct as a juror; or

 (c)  accepts or obtains, agrees to accept or attempts to obtain a bribe or other corrupt consideration to abstain from giving evidence, or to do or to refrain from doing anything as a juror.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 127
 R.S., c. 2(2nd Supp.), s. 3
 1972, c. 13, s. 8

 Marginal note: Public mischief
 140   (1)  Every one commits public mischief who, with intent to mislead, causes a peace officer to enter on or continue an investigation by
 (a)  making a false statement that accuses some other person of having committed an offence;

 (b)  doing anything intended to cause some other person to be suspected of having committed an offence that the other person has not committed, or to divert suspicion from himself;

 (c)  reporting that an offence has been committed when it has not been committed; or

 (d)  reporting or in any other way making it known or causing it to be made known that he or some other person has died when he or that other person has not died.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits public mischief
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 140
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 19

 Marginal note: Compounding indictable offence
 141   (1)  Every one who asks for or obtains or agrees to receive or obtain any valuable consideration for himself or any other person by agreeing to compound or conceal an indictable offence is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Exception for diversion agreements
 (2)  No offence is committed under subsection (1) where valuable consideration is received or obtained or is to be received or obtained under an agreement for compensation or restitution or personal services that is
 (a)  entered into with the consent of the Attorney General; or

 (b)  made as part of a program, approved by the Attorney General, to divert persons charged with indictable offences from criminal proceedings.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 141
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 19

 Marginal note: Corruptly taking reward for recovery of goods
 142  Every one who corruptly accepts any valuable consideration, directly or indirectly, under pretence or on account of helping any person to recover anything obtained by the commission of an indictable offence is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 130

 Marginal note: Advertising reward and immunity
 143  Every one who
 (a)  publicly advertises a reward for the return of anything that has been stolen or lost, and in the advertisement uses words to indicate that no questions will be asked if it is returned,

 (b)  uses words in a public advertisement to indicate that a reward will be given or paid for anything that has been stolen or lost, without interference with or inquiry about the person who produces it,

 (c)  promises or offers in a public advertisement to return to a person who has advanced money by way of loan on, or has bought, anything that has been stolen or lost, the money so advanced or paid, or any other sum of money for the return of that thing, or

 (d)  prints or publishes any advertisement referred to in paragraph (a), (b) or (c),

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 131

 Escapes and Rescues
 Marginal note: Prison breach
 144  Every one who
 (a)  by force or violence breaks a prison with intent to set at liberty himself or any other person confined therein, or

 (b)  with intent to escape forcibly breaks out of, or makes any breach in, a cell or other place within a prison in which he is confined,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 132
 1976-77, c. 53, s. 5

 Marginal note: Escape and being at large without excuse
 145   (1)  Every one who
 (a)  escapes from lawful custody, or

 (b)  is, before the expiration of a term of imprisonment to which he was sentenced, at large in or out of Canada without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Failure to attend court
 (2)  Every one who,
 (a)  being at large on his undertaking or recognizance given to or entered into before a justice or judge, fails, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him, to attend court in accordance with the undertaking or recognizance, or

 (b)  having appeared before a court, justice or judge, fails, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him, to attend court as thereafter required by the court, justice or judge,

 or to surrender himself in accordance with an order of the court, justice or judge, as the case may be, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Failure to comply with condition of undertaking or recognizance
 (3)  Every person who is at large on an undertaking or recognizance given to or entered into before a justice or judge and is bound to comply with a condition of that undertaking or recognizance directed by a justice or judge, and every person who is bound to comply with a direction ordered under subsection 515(12) or 522(2.1), and who fails, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on that person, to comply with that condition or direction, is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Failure to appear or to comply with summons
 (4)  Every one who is served with a summons and who fails, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him, to appear at a time and place stated therein, if any, for the purposes of the Identification of Criminals Act or to attend court in accordance therewith, is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Failure to comply with appearance notice or promise to appear
 (5)  Every person who is named in an appearance notice or promise to appear, or in a recognizance entered into before an officer in charge or another peace officer, that has been confirmed by a justice under section 508 and who fails, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on the person, to appear at the time and place stated therein, if any, for the purposes of the Identification of Criminals Act , or to attend court in accordance therewith, is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Failure to comply with conditions of undertaking
 (5.1)  Every person who, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on the person, fails to comply with any condition of an undertaking entered into pursuant to subsection 499(2) or 503(2.1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (6)  For the purposes of subsection (5), it is not a lawful excuse that an appearance notice, promise to appear or recognizance states defectively the substance of the alleged offence.

 (7)   [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 20]

 Marginal note: Election of Crown under Contraventions Act
 (8)  For the purposes of subsections (3) to (5), it is a lawful excuse to fail to comply with a condition of an undertaking or recognizance or to fail to appear at a time and place stated in a summons, an appearance notice, a promise to appear or a recognizance for the purposes of the Identification of Criminals Act if before the failure the Attorney General, within the meaning of the Contraventions Act , makes an election under section 50 of that Act.

 Marginal note: Proof of certain facts by certificate
 (9)  In any proceedings under subsection (2), (4) or (5), a certificate of the clerk of the court or a judge of the court before which the accused is alleged to have failed to attend or of the person in charge of the place at which it is alleged the accused failed to attend for the purposes of the Identification of Criminals Act stating that,
 (a)  in the case of proceedings under subsection (2), the accused gave or entered into an undertaking or recognizance before a justice or judge and failed to attend court in accordance therewith or, having attended court, failed to attend court thereafter as required by the court, justice or judge or to surrender in accordance with an order of the court, justice or judge, as the case may be,

 (b)  in the case of proceedings under subsection (4), a summons was issued to and served on the accused and the accused failed to attend court in accordance therewith or failed to appear at the time and place stated therein for the purposes of the Identification of Criminals Act , as the case may be, and

 (c)  in the case of proceedings under subsection (5), the accused was named in an appearance notice, a promise to appear or a recognizance entered into before an officer in charge or another peace officer, that was confirmed by a justice under section 508, and the accused failed to appear at the time and place stated therein for the purposes of the Identification of Criminals Act , failed to attend court in accordance therewith or, having attended court, failed to attend court thereafter as required by the court, justice or judge, as the case may be,

 is evidence of the statements contained in the certificate without proof of the signature or the official character of the person appearing to have signed the certificate.

 Marginal note: Attendance and right to cross-examination
 (10)  An accused against whom a certificate described in subsection (9) is produced may, with leave of the court, require the attendance of the person making the certificate for the purposes of cross-examination.

 Marginal note: Notice of intention to produce
 (11)  No certificate shall be received in evidence pursuant to subsection (9) unless the party intending to produce it has, before the trial, given to the accused reasonable notice of his intention together with a copy of the certificate.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 145
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 20
 1992, c. 47, s. 68
 1994, c. 44, s. 8
 1996, c. 7, s. 38
 1997, c. 18, s. 3

 Marginal note: Permitting or assisting escape
 146  Every one who
 (a)  permits a person whom he has in lawful custody to escape, by failing to perform a legal duty,

 (b)  conveys or causes to be conveyed into a prison anything, with intent to facilitate the escape of a person imprisoned therein, or

 (c)  directs or procures, under colour of pretended authority, the discharge of a prisoner who is not entitled to be discharged,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 134

 Marginal note: Rescue or permitting escape
 147  Every one who
 (a)  rescues any person from lawful custody or assists any person in escaping or attempting to escape from lawful custody,

 (b)  being a peace officer, wilfully permits a person in his lawful custody to escape, or

 (c)  being an officer of or an employee in a prison, wilfully permits a person to escape from lawful custody therein,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 135

 Marginal note: Assisting prisoner of war to escape
 148  Every one who knowingly and wilfully
 (a)  assists a prisoner of war in Canada to escape from a place where he is detained, or

 (b)  assists a prisoner of war, who is permitted to be at large on parole in Canada, to escape from the place where he is at large on parole,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 136

 Marginal note: Service of term for escape
 149   (1)  Notwithstanding section 743.1, a court that convicts a person for an escape committed while undergoing imprisonment may order that the term of imprisonment be served in a penitentiary, even if the time to be served is less than two years.

 Definition of escape
 (2)  In this section, escape means breaking prison, escaping from lawful custody or, without lawful excuse, being at large before the expiration of a term of imprisonment to which a person has been sentenced.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 149
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 203
 1992, c. 20, s. 199
 1995, c. 22, s. 1

 PART V Sexual Offences, Public Morals and Disorderly Conduct
 Interpretation
 Marginal note: Definitions
 150  In this Part,
 guardian guardian  includes any person who has in law or in fact the custody or control of another person; ( tuteur )
 public place public place  includes any place to which the public have access as of right or by invitation, express or implied; ( endroit public )
 theatre theatre  includes any place that is open to the public where entertainments are given, whether or not any charge is made for admission. ( théâtre )
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 138

 Sexual Offences
 Marginal note: Consent no defence
 150.1   (1)  Where an accused is charged with an offence under section 151 or 152 or subsection 153(1), 160(3) or 173(2) or is charged with an offence under section 271, 272 or 273 in respect of a complainant under the age of fourteen years, it is not a defence that the complainant consented to the activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1), where an accused is charged with an offence under section 151 or 152, subsection 173(2) or section 271 in respect of a complainant who is twelve years of age or more but under the age of fourteen years, it is not a defence that the complainant consented to the activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge unless the accused
 (a)  is twelve years of age or more but under the age of sixteen years;

 (b)  is less than two years older than the complainant; and

 (c)  is not in a position of trust or authority towards the complainant, is not a person with whom the complainant is in a relationship of dependency and is not in a relationship with the complainant that is exploitative of the complainant.

 Marginal note: Exemption for accused aged twelve or thirteen
 (3)  No person aged twelve or thirteen years shall be tried for an offence under section 151 or 152 or subsection 173(2) unless the person is in a position of trust or authority towards the complainant, is a person with whom the complainant is in a relationship of dependency or is in a relationship with the complainant that is exploitative of the complainant.

 Marginal note: Mistake of age
 (4)  It is not a defence to a charge under section 151 or 152, subsection 160(3) or 173(2), or section 271, 272 or 273 that the accused believed that the complainant was fourteen years of age or more at the time the offence is alleged to have been committed unless the accused took all reasonable steps to ascertain the age of the complainant.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (5)  It is not a defence to a charge under section 153, 159, 170, 171 or 172 or subsection 212(2) or (4) that the accused believed that the complainant was eighteen years of age or more at the time the offence is alleged to have been committed unless the accused took all reasonable steps to ascertain the age of the complainant.

 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 1
 2005, c. 32, s. 2

 Marginal note: Sexual interference
 151  Every person who, for a sexual purpose, touches, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, any part of the body of a person under the age of fourteen years
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of forty-five days; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of fourteen days.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 151
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 1
 2005, c. 32, s. 3

 Marginal note: Invitation to sexual touching
 152  Every person who, for a sexual purpose, invites, counsels or incites a person under the age of fourteen years to touch, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, the body of any person, including the body of the person who so invites, counsels or incites and the body of the person under the age of fourteen years,
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of forty-five days; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of fourteen days.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 152
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 1
 2005, c. 32, s. 3

 Marginal note: Sexual exploitation
 153   (1)  Every person commits an offence who is in a position of trust or authority towards a young person, who is a person with whom the young person is in a relationship of dependency or who is in a relationship with a young person that is exploitative of the young person, and who
 (a)  for a sexual purpose, touches, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, any part of the body of the young person; or

 (b)  for a sexual purpose, invites, counsels or incites a young person to touch, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, the body of any person, including the body of the person who so invites, counsels or incites and the body of the young person.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (1.1)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of forty-five days; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of fourteen days.

 Marginal note: Inference of sexual exploitation
 (1.2)  A judge may infer that a person is in a relationship with a young person that is exploitative of the young person from the nature and circumstances of the relationship, including
 (a)  the age of the young person;

 (b)  the age difference between the person and the young person;

 (c)  the evolution of the relationship; and

 (d)  the degree of control or influence by the person over the young person.

 Marginal note: Definition of “young person”
 (2)  In this section, young person means a person fourteen years of age or more but under the age of eighteen years.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 153
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 1
 2005, c. 32, s. 4

 Marginal note: Sexual exploitation of person with disability
 153.1   (1)  Every person who is in a position of trust or authority towards a person with a mental or physical disability or who is a person with whom a person with a mental or physical disability is in a relationship of dependency and who, for a sexual purpose, counsels or incites that person to touch, without that person’s consent, his or her own body, the body of the person who so counsels or incites, or the body of any other person, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months.

 Definition of consent
 (2)  Subject to subsection (3), consent means, for the purposes of this section, the voluntary agreement of the complainant to engage in the sexual activity in question.

 Marginal note: When no consent obtained
 (3)  No consent is obtained, for the purposes of this section, if
 (a)  the agreement is expressed by the words or conduct of a person other than the complainant;

 (b)  the complainant is incapable of consenting to the activity;

 (c)  the accused counsels or incites the complainant to engage in the activity by abusing a position of trust, power or authority;

 (d)  the complainant expresses, by words or conduct, a lack of agreement to engage in the activity; or

 (e)  the complainant, having consented to engage in sexual activity, expresses, by words or conduct, a lack of agreement to continue to engage in the activity.

 Marginal note: Subsection (3) not limiting
 (4)  Nothing in subsection (3) shall be construed as limiting the circumstances in which no consent is obtained.

 Marginal note: When belief in consent not a defence
 (5)  It is not a defence to a charge under this section that the accused believed that the complainant consented to the activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge if
 (a)  the accused’s belief arose from the accused’s
 (i)  self-induced intoxication, or

 (ii)  recklessness or wilful blindness; or

 (b)  the accused did not take reasonable steps, in the circumstances known to the accused at the time, to ascertain that the complainant was consenting.

 Marginal note: Accused’s belief as to consent
 (6)  If an accused alleges that he or she believed that the complainant consented to the conduct that is the subject-matter of the charge, a judge, if satisfied that there is sufficient evidence and that, if believed by the jury, the evidence would constitute a defence, shall instruct the jury, when reviewing all the evidence relating to the determination of the honesty of the accused’s belief, to consider the presence or absence of reasonable grounds for that belief.

 1998, c. 9, s. 2

 154   [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 1]
 Marginal note: Incest
 155   (1)  Every one commits incest who, knowing that another person is by blood relationship his or her parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent or grandchild, as the case may be, has sexual intercourse with that person.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits incest is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 Marginal note: Defence
 (3)  No accused shall be determined by a court to be guilty of an offence under this section if the accused was under restraint, duress or fear of the person with whom the accused had the sexual intercourse at the time the sexual intercourse occurred.

 Definition of brother and sister
 (4)  In this section, brother and sister , respectively, include half-brother and half-sister.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 155
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 21

 156 to 158   [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 2]
 Marginal note: Anal intercourse
 159   (1)  Every person who engages in an act of anal intercourse is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to any act engaged in, in private, between
 (a)  husband and wife, or

 (b)  any two persons, each of whom is eighteen years of age or more,

 both of whom consent to the act.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (3)  For the purposes of subsection (2),
 (a)  an act shall be deemed not to have been engaged in in private if it is engaged in in a public place or if more than two persons take part or are present; and

 (b)  a person shall be deemed not to consent to an act
 (i)  if the consent is extorted by force, threats or fear of bodily harm or is obtained by false and fraudulent misrepresentations respecting the nature and quality of the act, or

 (ii)  if the court is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the person could not have consented to the act by reason of mental disability.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 159
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 3

 Marginal note: Bestiality
 160   (1)  Every person who commits bestiality is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Compelling the commission of bestiality
 (2)  Every person who compels another to commit bestiality is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Bestiality in presence of or by child
 (3)  Notwithstanding subsection (1), every person who, in the presence of a person under the age of fourteen years, commits bestiality or who incites a person under the age of fourteen years to commit bestiality is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 160
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 3

 Marginal note: Order of prohibition
 161   (1)  When an offender is convicted, or is discharged on the conditions prescribed in a probation order under section 730, of an offence referred to in subsection (1.1) in respect of a person who is under the age of fourteen years, the court that sentences the offender or directs that the accused be discharged, as the case may be, in addition to any other punishment that may be imposed for that offence or any other condition prescribed in the order of discharge, shall consider making and may make, subject to the conditions or exemptions that the court directs, an order prohibiting the offender from
 (a)  attending a public park or public swimming area where persons under the age of fourteen years are present or can reasonably be expected to be present, or a daycare centre, schoolground, playground or community centre;

 (b)  seeking, obtaining or continuing any employment, whether or not the employment is remunerated, or becoming or being a volunteer in a capacity, that involves being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of fourteen years; or

 (c)  using a computer system within the meaning of subsection 342.1(2) for the purpose of communicating with a person under the age of fourteen years.

 Marginal note: Offences
 (1.1)  The offences for the purpose of subsection (1) are
 (a)  an offence under section 151, 152, 155 or 159, subsection 160(2) or (3), section 163.1, 170, 171 or 172.1, subsection 173(2) or section 271, 272, 273 or 281;

 (b)  an offence under section 144 (rape), 145 (attempt to commit rape), 149 (indecent assault on female), 156 (indecent assault on male) or 245 (common assault) or subsection 246(1) (assault with intent) of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read immediately before January 4, 1983; or

 (c)  an offence under subsection 146(1) (sexual intercourse with a female under 14) or section 153 (sexual intercourse with step-daughter), 155 (buggery or bestiality), 157 (gross indecency), 166 (parent or guardian procuring defilement) or 167 (householder permitting defilement) of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read immediately before January 1, 1988.

 Marginal note: Duration of prohibition
 (2)  The prohibition may be for life or for any shorter duration that the court considers desirable and, in the case of a prohibition that is not for life, the prohibition begins on the later of
 (a)  the date on which the order is made; and

 (b)  where the offender is sentenced to a term of imprisonment, the date on which the offender is released from imprisonment for the offence, including release on parole, mandatory supervision or statutory release.

 Marginal note: Court may vary order
 (3)  A court that makes an order of prohibition or, where the court is for any reason unable to act, another court of equivalent jurisdiction in the same province, may, on application of the offender or the prosecutor, require the offender to appear before it at any time and, after hearing the parties, that court may vary the conditions prescribed in the order if, in the opinion of the court, the variation is desirable because of changed circumstances after the conditions were prescribed.

 Marginal note: Offence
 (4)  Every person who is bound by an order of prohibition and who does not comply with the order is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 161
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 4
 1993, c. 45, s. 1
 1995, c. 22, s. 18
 1997, c. 18, s. 4
 1999, c. 31, s. 67
 2002, c. 13, s. 4
 2005, c. 32, s. 5

 Marginal note: Voyeurism
 162   (1)  Every one commits an offence who, surreptitiously, observes — including by mechanical or electronic means — or makes a visual recording of a person who is in circumstances that give rise to a reasonable expectation of privacy, if
 (a)  the person is in a place in which a person can reasonably be expected to be nude, to expose his or her genital organs or anal region or her breasts, or to be engaged in explicit sexual activity;

 (b)  the person is nude, is exposing his or her genital organs or anal region or her breasts, or is engaged in explicit sexual activity, and the observation or recording is done for the purpose of observing or recording a person in such a state or engaged in such an activity; or

 (c)  the observation or recording is done for a sexual purpose.

 Definition of visual recording
 (2)  In this section, visual recording includes a photographic, film or video recording made by any means.

 Marginal note: Exemption
 (3)  Paragraphs (1)(a) and (b) do not apply to a peace officer who, under the authority of a warrant issued under section 487.01, is carrying out any activity referred to in those paragraphs.

 Marginal note: Printing, publication, etc., of voyeuristic recordings
 (4)  Every one commits an offence who, knowing that a recording was obtained by the commission of an offence under subsection (1), prints, copies, publishes, distributes, circulates, sells, advertises or makes available the recording, or has the recording in his or her possession for the purpose of printing, copying, publishing, distributing, circulating, selling or advertising it or making it available.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (5)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1) or (4)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Defence
 (6)  No person shall be convicted of an offence under this section if the acts that are alleged to constitute the offence serve the public good and do not extend beyond what serves the public good.

 Marginal note: Question of law, motives
 (7)  For the purposes of subsection (6),
 (a)  it is a question of law whether an act serves the public good and whether there is evidence that the act alleged goes beyond what serves the public good, but it is a question of fact whether the act does or does not extend beyond what serves the public good; and

 (b)  the motives of an accused are irrelevant.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 162
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 4
 2005, c. 32, s. 6

 Offences Tending to Corrupt Morals
 Marginal note: Corrupting morals
 163   (1)  Every one commits an offence who
 (a)  makes, prints, publishes, distributes, circulates, or has in his possession for the purpose of publication, distribution or circulation any obscene written matter, picture, model, phonograph record or other thing whatever; or

 (b)  makes, prints, publishes, distributes, sells or has in his possession for the purpose of publication, distribution or circulation a crime comic.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (2)  Every one commits an offence who knowingly, without lawful justification or excuse,
 (a)  sells, exposes to public view or has in his possession for such a purpose any obscene written matter, picture, model, phonograph record or other thing whatever;

 (b)  publicly exhibits a disgusting object or an indecent show;

 (c)  offers to sell, advertises or publishes an advertisement of, or has for sale or disposal, any means, instructions, medicine, drug or article intended or represented as a method of causing abortion or miscarriage; or

 (d)  advertises or publishes an advertisement of any means, instructions, medicine, drug or article intended or represented as a method for restoring sexual virility or curing venereal diseases or diseases of the generative organs.

 Marginal note: Defence of public good
 (3)  No person shall be convicted of an offence under this section if the public good was served by the acts that are alleged to constitute the offence and if the acts alleged did not extend beyond what served the public good.

 Marginal note: Question of law and question of fact
 (4)  For the purposes of this section, it is a question of law whether an act served the public good and whether there is evidence that the act alleged went beyond what served the public good, but it is a question of fact whether the acts did or did not extend beyond what served the public good.

 Marginal note: Motives irrelevant
 (5)  For the purposes of this section, the motives of an accused are irrelevant.

 (6)   [Repealed, 1993, c. 46, s. 1]

 Definition of crime comic
 (7)  In this section, crime comic means a magazine, periodical or book that exclusively or substantially comprises matter depicting pictorially
 (a)  the commission of crimes, real or fictitious; or

 (b)  events connected with the commission of crimes, real or fictitious, whether occurring before or after the commission of the crime.

 Marginal note: Obscene publication
 (8)  For the purposes of this Act, any publication a dominant characteristic of which is the undue exploitation of sex, or of sex and any one or more of the following subjects, namely, crime, horror, cruelty and violence, shall be deemed to be obscene.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 163
 1993, c. 46, s. 1

 Definition of child pornography
 163.1   (1)  In this section, child pornography means
 (a)  a photographic, film, video or other visual representation, whether or not it was made by electronic or mechanical means,
 (i)  that shows a person who is or is depicted as being under the age of eighteen years and is engaged in or is depicted as engaged in explicit sexual activity, or

 (ii)  the dominant characteristic of which is the depiction, for a sexual purpose, of a sexual organ or the anal region of a person under the age of eighteen years;

 (b)  any written material, visual representation or audio recording that advocates or counsels sexual activity with a person under the age of eighteen years that would be an offence under this Act;

 (c)  any written material whose dominant characteristic is the description, for a sexual purpose, of sexual activity with a person under the age of eighteen years that would be an offence under this Act; or

 (d)  any audio recording that has as its dominant characteristic the description, presentation or representation, for a sexual purpose, of sexual activity with a person under the age of eighteen years that would be an offence under this Act.

 Marginal note: Making child pornography
 (2)  Every person who makes, prints, publishes or possesses for the purpose of publication any child pornography is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of ninety days.

 Marginal note: Distribution, etc. of child pornography
 (3)  Every person who transmits, makes available, distributes, sells, advertises, imports, exports or possesses for the purpose of transmission, making available, distribution, sale, advertising or exportation any child pornography is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of ninety days.

 Marginal note: Possession of child pornography
 (4)  Every person who possesses any child pornography is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of forty-five days; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of fourteen days.

 Marginal note: Accessing child pornography
 (4.1)  Every person who accesses any child pornography is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of forty-five days; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of fourteen days.

 Marginal note: Interpretation
 (4.2)  For the purposes of subsection (4.1), a person accesses child pornography who knowingly causes child pornography to be viewed by, or transmitted to, himself or herself.

 Marginal note: Aggravating factor
 (4.3)  If a person is convicted of an offence under this section, the court that imposes the sentence shall consider as an aggravating factor the fact that the person committed the offence with intent to make a profit.

 Marginal note: Defence
 (5)  It is not a defence to a charge under subsection (2) in respect of a visual representation that the accused believed that a person shown in the representation that is alleged to constitute child pornography was or was depicted as being eighteen years of age or more unless the accused took all reasonable steps to ascertain the age of that person and took all reasonable steps to ensure that, where the person was eighteen years of age or more, the representation did not depict that person as being under the age of eighteen years.

 Marginal note: Defence
 (6)  No person shall be convicted of an offence under this section if the act that is alleged to constitute the offence
 (a)  has a legitimate purpose related to the administration of justice or to science, medicine, education or art; and

 (b)  does not pose an undue risk of harm to persons under the age of eighteen years.

 Marginal note: Question of law
 (7)  For greater certainty, for the purposes of this section, it is a question of law whether any written material, visual representation or audio recording advocates or counsels sexual activity with a person under the age of eighteen years that would be an offence under this Act.

 1993, c. 46, s. 2
 2002, c. 13, s. 5
 2005, c. 32, s. 7

 Marginal note: Warrant of seizure
 164   (1)  A judge who is satisfied by information on oath that there are reasonable grounds for believing that
 (a)  any publication, copies of which are kept for sale or distribution in premises within the jurisdiction of the court, is obscene or a crime comic, within the meaning of section 163,

 (b)  any representation, written material or recording, copies of which are kept in premises within the jurisdiction of the court, is child pornography within the meaning of section 163.1, or

 (c)  any recording, copies of which are kept for sale or distribution in premises within the jurisdiction of the court, is a voyeuristic recording,

 may issue a warrant authorizing seizure of the copies.

 Marginal note: Summons to occupier
 (2)  Within seven days of the issue of a warrant under subsection (1), the judge shall issue a summons to the occupier of the premises requiring him to appear before the court and show cause why the matter seized should not be forfeited to Her Majesty.

 Marginal note: Owner and maker may appear
 (3)  The owner and the maker of the matter seized under subsection (1), and alleged to be obscene, a crime comic, child pornography or a voyeuristic recording, may appear and be represented in the proceedings in order to oppose the making of an order for the forfeiture of the matter.

 Marginal note: Order of forfeiture
 (4)  If the court is satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that the publication, representation, written material or recording referred to in subsection (1) is obscene, a crime comic, child pornography or a voyeuristic recording, it may make an order declaring the matter forfeited to Her Majesty in right of the province in which the proceedings take place, for disposal as the Attorney General may direct.

 Marginal note: Disposal of matter
 (5)  If the court is not satisfied that the publication, representation, written material or recording referred to in subsection (1) is obscene, a crime comic, child pornography or a voyeuristic recording, it shall order that the matter be restored to the person from whom it was seized without delay after the time for final appeal has expired.

 Marginal note: Appeal
 (6)  An appeal lies from an order made under subsection (4) or (5) by any person who appeared in the proceedings
 (a)  on any ground of appeal that involves a question of law alone,

 (b)  on any ground of appeal that involves a question of fact alone, or

 (c)  on any ground of appeal that involves a question of mixed law and fact,

 as if it were an appeal against conviction or against a judgment or verdict of acquittal, as the case may be, on a question of law alone under Part XXI and sections 673 to 696 apply with such modifications as the circumstances require.

 Marginal note: Consent
 (7)  If an order is made under this section by a judge in a province with respect to one or more copies of a publication, a representation, written material or a recording, no proceedings shall be instituted or continued in that province under section 162, 163 or 163.1 with respect to those or other copies of the same publication, representation, written material or recording without the consent of the Attorney General.

 Marginal note: Definitions
 (8)  In this section,
 court
 tribunal
 court means
 (a)  in the Province of Quebec, the Court of Quebec, the municipal court of Montreal and the municipal court of Quebec,

 (a.1)  in the Province of Ontario, the Superior Court of Justice,

 (b)  in the Provinces of New Brunswick, Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta, the Court of Queen’s Bench,

 (c)  in the Provinces of Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland, the Trial Division of the Supreme Court,

 (c.1)   [Repealed, 1992, c. 51, s. 34]

 (d)  in the Provinces of Nova Scotia and British Columbia, in Yukon and in the Northwest Territories, the Supreme Court, and

 (e)  in Nunavut, the Nunavut Court of Justice; ( tribunal )

 crime comic
 histoire illustrée de crime
 crime comic has the same meaning as in section 163; ( histoire illustrée de crime )
 judge
 juge
 judge means a judge of a court. ( juge )
 voyeuristic recording
 enregistrement voyeuriste
 voyeuristic recording means a visual recording within the meaning of subsection 162(2) that is made as described in subsection 162(1). ( enregistrement voyeuriste )

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 164
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (2nd Supp.), s. 10, c. 40 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1990, c. 16, s. 3, c. 17, s. 9
 1992, c. 1, s. 58, c. 51, s. 34
 1993, c. 46, s. 3
 1997, c. 18, s. 5
 1998, c. 30, s. 14
 1999, c. 3, s. 27
 2002, c. 7, s. 139, c. 13, s. 6
 2005, c. 32, s. 8

 Marginal note: Warrant of seizure
 164.1   (1)  If a judge is satisfied by information on oath that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there is material — namely child pornography within the meaning of section 163.1, a voyeuristic recording within the meaning of subsection 164(8) or data within the meaning of subsection 342.1(2) that makes child pornography or a voyeuristic recording available — that is stored on and made available through a computer system within the meaning of subsection 342.1(2) that is within the jurisdiction of the court, the judge may order the custodian of the computer system to
 (a)  give an electronic copy of the material to the court;

 (b)  ensure that the material is no longer stored on and made available through the computer system; and

 (c)  provide the information necessary to identify and locate the person who posted the material.

 Marginal note: Notice to person who posted the material
 (2)  Within a reasonable time after receiving the information referred to in paragraph (1)(c), the judge shall cause notice to be given to the person who posted the material, giving that person the opportunity to appear and be represented before the court, and show cause why the material should not be deleted. If the person cannot be identified or located or does not reside in Canada, the judge may order the custodian of the computer system to post the text of the notice at the location where the material was previously stored and made available, until the time set for the appearance.

 Marginal note: Person who posted the material may appear
 (3)  The person who posted the material may appear and be represented in the proceedings in order to oppose the making of an order under subsection (5).

 Marginal note: Non-appearance
 (4)  If the person who posted the material does not appear for the proceedings, the court may proceed ex parte to hear and determine the proceedings in the absence of the person as fully and effectually as if the person had appeared.

 Marginal note: Order
 (5)  If the court is satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that the material is child pornog­raphy within the meaning of section 163.1, a voyeuristic recording within the meaning of subsection 164(8) or data within the meaning of subsection 342.1(2) that makes child pornography or the voyeuristic recording available, it may order the custodian of the computer system to delete the material.

 Marginal note: Destruction of copy
 (6)  When the court makes the order for the deletion of the material, it may order the destruction of the electronic copy in the court’s possession.

 Marginal note: Return of material
 (7)  If the court is not satisfied that the material is child pornography within the meaning of section 163.1, a voyeuristic recording within the meaning of subsection 164(8) or data within the meaning of subsection 342.1(2) that makes child pornography or the voyeuristic recording available, the court shall order that the electronic copy be returned to the custodian and terminate the order under paragraph (1)(b).

 Marginal note: Other provisions to apply
 (8)  Subsections 164(6) to (8) apply, with any modifications that the circumstances require, to this section.

 Marginal note: When order takes effect
 (9)  No order made under subsections (5) to (7) takes effect until the time for final appeal has expired.

 2002, c. 13, s. 7
 2005, c. 32, s. 9

 Marginal note: Forfeiture of things used for child pornography
 164.2   (1)  On application of the Attorney General, a court that convicts a person of an offence under section 163.1, in addition to any other punishment that it may impose, may order that any thing — other than real property — be forfeited to Her Majesty and disposed of as the Attorney General directs if it is satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that the thing
 (a)  was used in the commission of the offence; and

 (b)  is the property of
 (i)  the convicted person or another person who was a party to the offence, or

 (ii)  a person who acquired the thing from a person referred to in subparagraph (i) under circumstances that give rise to a reasonable inference that it was transferred for the purpose of avoiding forfeiture.

 Marginal note: Third party rights
 (2)  Before making an order under subsection (1), the court shall cause notice to be given to, and may hear, any person whom it considers to have an interest in the thing, and may declare the nature and extent of the person’s interest in it.

 Marginal note: Right of appeal — third party
 (3)  A person who was heard in response to a notice given under subsection (2) may appeal to the court of appeal against an order made under subsection (1).

 Marginal note: Right of appeal — Attorney General
 (4)  The Attorney General may appeal to the court of appeal against the refusal of a court to make an order under subsection (1).

 Marginal note: Application of Part XXI
 (5)  Part XXI applies, with any modifications that the circumstances require, with respect to the procedure for an appeal under subsections (3) and (4).

 2002, c. 13, s. 7

 Marginal note: Relief from forfeiture
 164.3   (1)  Within thirty days after an order under subsection 164.2(1) is made, a person who claims an interest in the thing forfeited may apply in writing to a judge for an order under subsection (4).

 Marginal note: Hearing of application
 (2)  The judge shall fix a day — not less than thirty days after the application is made — for its hearing.

 Marginal note: Notice to Attorney General
 (3)  At least fifteen days before the hearing, the applicant shall cause notice of the application and of the hearing day to be served on the Attorney General.

 Marginal note: Order
 (4)  The judge may make an order declaring that the applicant’s interest in the thing is not affected by the forfeiture and declaring the nature and extent of the interest if the judge is satisfied that the applicant
 (a)  was not a party to the offence; and

 (b)  did not acquire the thing from a person who was a party to the offence under circumstances that give rise to a reasonable inference that it was transferred for the purpose of avoiding forfeiture.

 Marginal note: Appeal to court of appeal
 (5)  A person referred to in subsection (4) or the Attorney General may appeal to the court of appeal against an order made under that subsection. Part XXI applies, with any modifications that the circumstances require, with respect to the procedure for an appeal under this subsection.

 Marginal note: Powers of Attorney General
 (6)  On application by a person who obtained an order under subsection (4), made after the expiration of the time allowed for an appeal against the order and, if an appeal is taken, after it has been finally disposed of, the Attorney General shall direct that
 (a)  the thing be returned to the person; or

 (b)  an amount equal to the value of the extent of the person’s interest, as declared in the order, be paid to the person.

 2002, c. 13, s. 7

 Marginal note: Tied sale
 165  Every one commits an offence who refuses to sell or supply to any other person copies of any publication for the reason only that the other person refuses to purchase or acquire from him copies of any other publication that the other person is apprehensive may be obscene or a crime comic.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 161

 166   [Repealed, 1994, c. 44, s. 9]
 Marginal note: Immoral theatrical performance
 167   (1)  Every one commits an offence who, being the lessee, manager, agent or person in charge of a theatre, presents or gives or allows to be presented or given therein an immoral, indecent or obscene performance, entertainment or representation.

 Marginal note: Person taking part
 (2)  Every one commits an offence who takes part or appears as an actor, a performer or an assistant in any capacity, in an immoral, indecent or obscene performance, entertainment or representation in a theatre.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 163

 Marginal note: Mailing obscene matter
 168   (1)  Every one commits an offence who makes use of the mails for the purpose of transmitting or delivering anything that is obscene, indecent, immoral or scurrilous.

 Marginal note: Exceptions
 (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to a person who
 (a)  prints or publishes any matter for use in connection with any judicial proceedings or communicates it to persons who are concerned in the proceedings;

 (b)  prints or publishes a notice or report under the direction of a court; or

 (c)  prints or publishes any matter
 (i)  in a volume or part of a genuine series of law reports that does not form part of any other publication and consists solely of reports of proceedings in courts of law, or

 (ii)  in a publication of a technical character that is intended, in good faith, for circulation among members of the legal or medical profession.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 168
 1999, c. 5, s. 2

 Marginal note: Punishment
 169  Every one who commits an offence under section 163, 165, 167 or 168 is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 169
 1999, c. 5, s. 3

 Marginal note: Parent or guardian procuring sexual activity
 170  Every parent or guardian of a person under the age of eighteen years who procures the person for the purpose of engaging in any sexual activity prohibited by this Act with a person other than the parent or guardian is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of six months if the person procured is under the age of fourteen years; or

 (b)  to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of forty-five days if the person procured is fourteen years of age or more but under the age of eighteen years.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 170
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 5
 2005, c. 32, s. 9.1

 Marginal note: Householder permitting sexual activity
 171  Every owner, occupier or manager of premises, or any other person who has control of premises or assists in the management or control of premises, who knowingly permits a person under the age of eighteen years to resort to or to be in or on the premises for the purpose of engaging in any sexual activity prohibited by this Act is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of six months if the person in question is under the age of fourteen years; or

 (b)  to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of forty-five days if the person is fourteen years of age or more but under the age of eighteen years.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 171
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 5
 2005, c. 32, s. 9.1

 Marginal note: Corrupting children
 172   (1)  Every one who, in the home of a child, participates in adultery or sexual immorality or indulges in habitual drunkenness or any other form of vice, and thereby endangers the morals of the child or renders the home an unfit place for the child to be in, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 (2)   [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 6]

 Definition of child
 (3)  For the purposes of this section, child means a person who is or appears to be under the age of eighteen years.

 Marginal note: Who may institute prosecutions
 (4)  No proceedings shall be commenced under subsection (1) without the consent of the Attorney General, unless they are instituted by or at the instance of a recognized society for the protection of children or by an officer of a juvenile court.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 172
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 6

 Marginal note: Luring a child
 172.1   (1)  Every person commits an offence who, by means of a computer system within the meaning of subsection 342.1(2), communicates with
 (a)  a person who is, or who the accused believes is, under the age of eighteen years, for the purpose of facilitating the commission of an offence under subsection 153(1), section 155 or 163.1, subsection 212(1) or (4) or section 271, 272 or 273 with respect to that person;

 (b)  a person who is, or who the accused believes is, under the age of sixteen years, for the purpose of facilitating the commission of an offence under section 280 with respect to that person; or

 (c)  a person who is, or who the accused believes is, under the age of fourteen years, for the purpose of facilitating the commission of an offence under section 151 or 152, subsection 160(3) or 173(2) or section 281 with respect to that person.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than ten years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months.

 Marginal note: Presumption re age
 (3)  Evidence that the person referred to in paragraph (1)(a), (b) or (c) was represented to the accused as being under the age of eighteen years, sixteen years or fourteen years, as the case may be, is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof that the accused believed that the person was under that age.

 Marginal note: No defence
 (4)  It is not a defence to a charge under paragraph (1)(a), (b) or (c) that the accused believed that the person referred to in that paragraph was at least eighteen years of age, sixteen years or fourteen years of age, as the case may be, unless the accused took reasonable steps to ascertain the age of the person.

 2002, c. 13, s. 8
 2007, c. 20, s. 1

 Disorderly Conduct
 Marginal note: Indecent acts
 173   (1)  Every one who wilfully does an indecent act
 (a)  in a public place in the presence of one or more persons, or

 (b)  in any place, with intent thereby to insult or offend any person,

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Exposure
 (2)  Every person who, in any place, for a sexual purpose, exposes his or her genital organs to a person who is under the age of fourteen years is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 173
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 7

 Marginal note: Nudity
 174   (1)  Every one who, without lawful excuse,
 (a)  is nude in a public place, or

 (b)  is nude and exposed to public view while on private property, whether or not the property is his own,

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Nude
 (2)  For the purposes of this section, a person is nude who is so clad as to offend against public decency or order.

 Marginal note: Consent of Attorney General
 (3)  No proceedings shall be commenced under this section without the consent of the Attorney General.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 170

 Marginal note: Causing disturbance, indecent exhibition, loitering, etc.
 175   (1)  Every one who
 (a)  not being in a dwelling-house, causes a disturbance in or near a public place,
 (i)  by fighting, screaming, shouting, swearing, singing or using insulting or obscene language,

 (ii)  by being drunk, or

 (iii)  by impeding or molesting other persons,

 (b)  openly exposes or exhibits an indecent exhibition in a public place,

 (c)  loiters in a public place and in any way obstructs persons who are in that place, or

 (d)  disturbs the peace and quiet of the occupants of a dwelling-house by discharging firearms or by other disorderly conduct in a public place or who, not being an occupant of a dwelling-house comprised in a particular building or structure, disturbs the peace and quiet of the occupants of a dwelling-house comprised in the building or structure by discharging firearms or by other disorderly conduct in any part of a building or structure to which, at the time of such conduct, the occupants of two or more dwelling-houses comprised in the building or structure have access as of right or by invitation, express or implied,

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Evidence of peace officer
 (2)  In the absence of other evidence, or by way of corroboration of other evidence, a summary conviction court may infer from the evidence of a peace officer relating to the conduct of a person or persons, whether ascertained or not, that a disturbance described in paragraph (1)(a) or (d) or an obstruction described in paragraph (1)(c) was caused or occurred.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 175
 1997, c. 18, s. 6

 Marginal note: Obstructing or violence to or arrest of officiating clergyman
 176   (1)  Every one who
 (a)  by threats or force, unlawfully obstructs or prevents or endeavours to obstruct or prevent a clergyman or minister from celebrating divine service or performing any other function in connection with his calling, or

 (b)  knowing that a clergyman or minister is about to perform, is on his way to perform or is returning from the performance of any of the duties or functions mentioned in paragraph (a)
 (i)  assaults or offers any violence to him, or

 (ii)  arrests him on a civil process, or under the pretence of executing a civil process,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Disturbing religious worship or certain meetings
 (2)  Every one who wilfully disturbs or interrupts an assemblage of persons met for religious worship or for a moral, social or benevolent purpose is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (3)  Every one who, at or near a meeting referred to in subsection (2), wilfully does anything that disturbs the order or solemnity of the meeting is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 172

 Marginal note: Trespassing at night
 177  Every one who, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him, loiters or prowls at night on the property of another person near a dwelling-house situated on that property is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 173

 Marginal note: Offensive volatile substance
 178  Every one other than a peace officer engaged in the discharge of his duty who has in his possession in a public place or who deposits, throws or injects or causes to be deposited, thrown or injected in, into or near any place,
 (a)  an offensive volatile substance that is likely to alarm, inconvenience, discommode or cause discomfort to any person or to cause damage to property, or

 (b)  a stink or stench bomb or device from which any substance mentioned in paragraph (a) is or is capable of being liberated,

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 174

 Marginal note: Vagrancy
 179   (1)  Every one commits vagrancy who
 (a)  supports himself in whole or in part by gaming or crime and has no lawful profession or calling by which to maintain himself; or

 (b)  having at any time been convicted of an offence under section 151, 152 or 153, subsection 160(3) or 173(2) or section 271, 272 or 273, or of an offence under a provision referred to in paragraph (b) of the definition serious personal injury offence in section 687 of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read before January 4, 1983, is found loitering in or near a school ground, playground, public park or bathing area.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits vagrancy is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 179
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 22, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 8

 Nuisances
 Marginal note: Common nuisance
 180   (1)  Every one who commits a common nuisance and thereby
 (a)  endangers the lives, safety or health of the public, or

 (b)  causes physical injury to any person,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Definition
 (2)  For the purposes of this section, every one commits a common nuisance who does an unlawful act or fails to discharge a legal duty and thereby
 (a)  endangers the lives, safety, health, property or comfort of the public; or

 (b)  obstructs the public in the exercise or enjoyment of any right that is common to all the subjects of Her Majesty in Canada.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 176

 Marginal note: Spreading false news
 181  Every one who wilfully publishes a statement, tale or news that he knows is false and that causes or is likely to cause injury or mischief to a public interest is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 177

 Marginal note: Dead body
 182  Every one who
 (a)  neglects, without lawful excuse, to perform any duty that is imposed on him by law or that he undertakes with reference to the burial of a dead human body or human remains, or

 (b)  improperly or indecently interferes with or offers any indignity to a dead human body or human remains, whether buried or not,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 178

 PART VI Invasion of Privacy
 Definitions
 Marginal note: Definitions
 183  In this Part,
 authorization
 autorisation
 authorization means an authorization to intercept a private communication given under section 186 or subsection 184.2(3), 184.3(6) or 188(2); ( autorisation )
 electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device
 dispositif électromagnétique, acoustique, mécanique ou autre
 electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device means any device or apparatus that is used or is capable of being used to intercept a private communication, but does not include a hearing aid used to correct subnormal hearing of the user to not better than normal hearing; ( dispositif électromagnétique, acoustique, mécanique ou autre )
 intercept
 intercepter
 intercept includes listen to, record or acquire a communication or acquire the substance, meaning or purport thereof; ( intercepter )
 offence
 infraction
 offence means an offence contrary to, any conspiracy or attempt to commit or being an accessory after the fact in relation to an offence contrary to, or any counselling in relation to an offence contrary to
 (a)  any of the following provisions of this Act, namely,
 (i)  section 47 (high treason),

 (ii)  section 51 (intimidating Parliament or a legislature),

 (iii)  section 52 (sabotage),

 (iv)  section 57 (forgery, etc.),

 (v)  section 61 (sedition),

 (vi)  section 76 (hijacking),

 (vii)  section 77 (endangering safety of aircraft or airport),

 (viii)  section 78 (offensive weapons, etc., on aircraft),

 (ix)  section 78.1 (offences against maritime navigation or fixed platforms),

 (x)  section 80 (breach of duty),

 (xi)  section 81 (using explosives),

 (xii)  section 82 (possessing explosives),

 (xii.1)  section 83.02 (providing or collecting property for certain activities),

 (xii.2)  section 83.03 (providing, making available, etc., property or services for terrorist purposes),

 (xii.3)  section 83.04 (using or possessing property for terrorist purposes),

 (xii.4)  section 83.18 (participation in activity of terrorist group),

 (xii.5)  section 83.19 (facilitating terrorist activity),

 (xii.6)  section 83.2 (commission of offence for terrorist group),

 (xii.7)  section 83.21 (instructing to carry out activity for terrorist group),

 (xii.8)  section 83.22 (instructing to carry out terrorist activity),

 (xii.9)  section 83.23 (harbouring or concealing),

 (xii.91)  section 83.231 (hoax — terrorist activity),

 (xiii)  section 96 (possession of weapon obtained by commission of offence),

 (xiv)  section 99 (weapons trafficking),

 (xv)  section 100 (possession for purpose of weapons trafficking),

 (xvi)  section 102 (making automatic firearm),

 (xvii)  section 103 (importing or exporting knowing it is unauthorized),

 (xviii)  section 104 (unauthorized importing or exporting),

 (xix)  section 119 (bribery, etc.),

 (xx)  section 120 (bribery, etc.),

 (xxi)  section 121 (fraud on government),

 (xxii)  section 122 (breach of trust),

 (xxiii)  section 123 (municipal corruption),

 (xxiv)  section 132 (perjury),

 (xxv)  section 139 (obstructing justice),

 (xxvi)  section 144 (prison breach),

 (xxvii)  subsection 145(1) (escape, etc.),

 (xxvii.1)  section 162 (voyeurism),

 (xxviii)  paragraph 163(1)(a) (obscene materials),

 (xxix)  section 163.1 (child pornography),

 (xxx)  section 184 (unlawful interception),

 (xxxi)  section 191 (possession of intercepting device),

 (xxxii)  subsection 201(1) (keeping gaming or betting house),

 (xxxiii)  paragraph 202(1)(e) (pool-selling, etc.),

 (xxxiv)  subsection 210(1) (keeping common bawdy house),

 (xxxv)  subsection 212(1) (procuring),

 (xxxvi)  subsection 212(2) (procuring),

 (xxxvii)  subsection 212(2.1) (aggravated offence in relation to living on the avails of prostitution of a person under the age of eighteen years),

 (xxxviii)  subsection 212(4) (offence — prostitution of person under eighteen),

 (xxxix)  section 235 (murder),

 (xl)  section 264.1 (uttering threats),

 (xli)  section 267 (assault with a weapon or causing bodily harm),

 (xlii)  section 268 (aggravated assault),

 (xliii)  section 269 (unlawfully causing bodily harm),

 (xliv)  section 271 (sexual assault),

 (xlv)  section 272 (sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm),

 (xlvi)  section 273 (aggravated sexual assault),

 (xlvii)  section 279 (kidnapping),

 (xlvii.1)  section 279.01 (trafficking in persons),

 (xlvii.2)  section 279.02 (material benefit),

 (xlvii.3)  section 279.03 (withholding or destroying documents),

 (xlviii)  section 279.1 (hostage taking),

 (xlix)  section 280 (abduction of person under sixteen),

 (l)  section 281 (abduction of person under fourteen),

 (li)  section 282 (abduction in contravention of custody order),

 (lii)  section 283 (abduction),

 (liii)  section 318 (advocating genocide),

 (liv)  section 327 (possession of device to obtain telecommunication facility or service),

 (lv)  section 334 (theft),

 (lvi)  section 342 (theft, forgery, etc., of credit card),

 (lvii)  section 342.1 (unauthorized use of computer),

 (lviii)  section 342.2 (possession of device to obtain computer service),

 (lix)  section 344 (robbery),

 (lx)  section 346 (extortion),

 (lxi)  section 347 (criminal interest rate),

 (lxii)  section 348 (breaking and entering),

 (lxiii)  section 354 (possession of property obtained by crime),

 (lxiv)  section 356 (theft from mail),

 (lxv)  section 367 (forgery),

 (lxvi)  section 368 (uttering forged document),

 (lxvii)  section 372 (false messages),

 (lxviii)  section 380 (fraud),

 (lxix)  section 381 (using mails to defraud),

 (lxx)  section 382 (fraudulent manipulation of stock exchange transactions),

 (lxxi)  section 423.1 (intimidation of justice system participant or journalist),

 (lxxii)  section 424 (threat to commit offences against internationally protected person),

 (lxxii.1)  section 424.1 (threat against United Nations or associated personnel),

 (lxxiii)  section 426 (secret commissions),

 (lxxiv)  section 430 (mischief),

 (lxxv)  section 431 (attack on premises, residence or transport of internationally protected person),

 (lxxv.1)  section 431.1 (attack on premises, accommodation or transport of United Nations or associated personnel),

 (lxxv.2)  subsection 431.2(2) (explosive or other lethal device),

 (lxxvi)  section 433 (arson),

 (lxxvii)  section 434 (arson),

 (lxxviii)  section 434.1 (arson),

 (lxxix)  section 435 (arson for fraudulent purpose),

 (lxxx)  section 449 (making counterfeit money),

 (lxxxi)  section 450 (possession, etc., of counterfeit money),

 (lxxxii)  section 452 (uttering, etc., counterfeit money),

 (lxxxiii)  section 462.31 (laundering proceeds of crime),

 (lxxxiv)  subsection 462.33(11) (acting in contravention of restraint order),

 (lxxxv)  section 467.11 (participation in criminal organization),

 (lxxxvi)  section 467.12 (commission of offence for criminal organization), or

 (lxxxvii)  section 467.13 (instructing commission of offence for criminal organization),

 (b)  section 198 (fraudulent bankruptcy) of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act ,

 (b.1)  any of the following provisions of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention Implementation Act , namely,
 (i)  section 6 (production, etc., of biological agents and means of delivery), or

 (ii)  section 7 (unauthorized production, etc., of biological agents),

 (c)  any of the following provisions of the Competition Act , namely,
 (i)  section 45 (conspiracy) in relation to any of the matters referred to in paragraphs 45(4)(a) to (d) of that Act,

 (ii)  section 47 (bid-rigging), or

 (iii)  subsection 52.1(3) (deceptive telemarketing),

 (d)  any of the following provisions of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act , namely,
 (i)  section 5 (trafficking),

 (ii)  section 6 (importing and exporting), or

 (iii)  section 7 (production),

 (e)  section 3 (bribing a foreign public official) of the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act ,

 (e.1)  the Crimes Against Humanity and War Crimes Act ,

 (f)  either of the following provisions of the Customs Act , namely,
 (i)  section 153 (false statements), or

 (ii)  section 159 (smuggling),

 (g)  any of the following provisions of the Excise Act, 2001 , namely,
 (i)  section 214 (unlawful production, sale, etc., of tobacco or alcohol),

 (ii)  section 216 (unlawful possession of tobacco product),

 (iii)  section 218 (unlawful possession, sale, etc., of alcohol),

 (iv)  section 219 (falsifying or destroying records),

 (v)  section 230 (possession of property obtained by excise offences), or

 (vi)  section 231 (laundering proceeds of excise offences),

 (h)  any of the following provisions of the Export and Import Permits Act , namely,
 (i)  section 13 (export or attempt to export),

 (ii)  section 14 (import or attempt to import),

 (iii)  section 15 (diversion, etc.),

 (iv)  section 16 (no transfer of permits),

 (v)  section 17 (false information), or

 (vi)  section 18 (aiding and abetting),

 (i)  any of the following provisions of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act , namely,
 (i)  section 117 (organizing entry into Canada),

 (ii)  section 118 (trafficking in persons),

 (iii)  section 119 (disembarking persons at sea),

 (iv)  section 122 (offences related to documents),

 (v)  section 126 (counselling misrepresentation), or

 (vi)  section 129 (offences relating to officers), or

 (j)  any offence under the Security of Information Act ,

 and includes any other offence that there are reasonable grounds to believe is a criminal organization offence or any other offence that there are reasonable grounds to believe is an offence described in paragraph (b) or (c) of the definition terrorism offence in section 2; ( infraction )
 private communication
 communication privée
 private communication means any oral communication, or any telecommunication, that is made by an originator who is in Canada or is intended by the originator to be received by a person who is in Canada and that is made under circumstances in which it is reasonable for the originator to expect that it will not be intercepted by any person other than the person intended by the originator to receive it, and includes any radio-based telephone communication that is treated electronically or otherwise for the purpose of preventing intelligible reception by any person other than the person intended by the originator to receive it; ( communication privée )
 public switched telephone network
 réseau téléphonique public commuté
 public switched telephone network means a telecommunication facility the primary purpose of which is to provide a land line-based telephone service to the public for compensation; ( réseau téléphonique public commuté )
 radio-based telephone communication
 communication radiotéléphonique
 radio-based telephone communication means any radiocommunication within the meaning of the Radiocommunication Act that is made over apparatus that is used primarily for connection to a public switched telephone network; ( communication radiotéléphonique )
 sell
 vendre
 sell includes offer for sale, expose for sale, have in possession for sale or distribute or advertise for sale; ( vendre )
 solicitor
 avocat
 solicitor means, in the Province of Quebec, an advocate or a notary and, in any other province, a barrister or solicitor. ( avocat )
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 183
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), ss. 7, 23, c. 1 (2nd Supp.), s. 213, c. 1 (4th Supp.), s. 13, c. 29 (4th Supp.), s. 17, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 1
 1991, c. 28, s. 12
 1992, c. 27, s. 90
 1993, c. 7, s. 5, c. 25, s. 94, c. 40, s. 1, c. 46, s. 4
 1995, c. 39, s. 140
 1996, c. 19, s. 66
 1997, c. 18, s. 7, c. 23, s. 3
 1998, c. 34, s. 8
 1999, c. 2, s. 47, c. 5, s. 4
 2000, c. 24, s. 43
 2001, c. 32, s. 4, c. 41, ss. 5, 31, 133
 2002, c. 22, s. 409
 2004, c. 15, s. 108
 2005, c. 32, s. 10, c. 43, s. 1

 Marginal note: Consent to interception
 183.1  Where a private communication is originated by more than one person or is intended by the originator thereof to be received by more than one person, a consent to the interception thereof by any one of those persons is sufficient consent for the purposes of any provision of this Part.
 1993, c. 40, s. 2

 Interception of Communications
 Marginal note: Interception
 184   (1)  Every one who, by means of any electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device, wilfully intercepts a private communication is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Saving provision
 (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to
 (a)  a person who has the consent to intercept, express or implied, of the originator of the private communication or of the person intended by the originator thereof to receive it;

 (b)  a person who intercepts a private communication in accordance with an authorization or pursuant to section 184.4 or any person who in good faith aids in any way another person who the aiding person believes on reasonable grounds is acting with an authorization or pursuant to section 184.4;

 (c)  a person engaged in providing a telephone, telegraph or other communication service to the public who intercepts a private communication,
 (i)  if the interception is necessary for the purpose of providing the service,

 (ii)  in the course of service observing or random monitoring necessary for the purpose of mechanical or service quality control checks, or

 (iii)  if the interception is necessary to protect the person’s rights or property directly related to providing the service;

 (d)  an officer or servant of Her Majesty in right of Canada who engages in radio frequency spectrum management, in respect of a private communication intercepted by that officer or servant for the purpose of identifying, isolating or preventing an unauthorized or interfering use of a frequency or of a transmission; or

 (e)  a person, or any person acting on their behalf, in possession or control of a computer system, as defined in subsection 342.1(2), who intercepts a private communication originating from, directed to or transmitting through that computer system, if the interception is reasonably necessary for
 (i)  managing the quality of service of the computer system as it relates to performance factors such as the responsiveness and capacity of the system as well as the integrity and availability of the system and data, or

 (ii)  protecting the computer system against any act that would be an offence under subsection 342.1(1) or 430(1.1).

 Marginal note: Use or retention
 (3)  A private communication intercepted by a person referred to in paragraph (2)(e) can be used or retained only if
 (a)  it is essential to identify, isolate or prevent harm to the computer system; or

 (b)  it is to be disclosed in circumstances referred to in subsection 193(2).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 184
 1993, c. 40, s. 3
 2004, c. 12, s. 4

 Marginal note: Interception to prevent bodily harm
 184.1   (1)  An agent of the state may intercept, by means of any electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device, a private communication if
 (a)  either the originator of the private communication or the person intended by the originator to receive it has consented to the interception;

 (b)  the agent of the state believes on reasonable grounds that there is a risk of bodily harm to the person who consented to the interception; and

 (c)  the purpose of the interception is to prevent the bodily harm.

 Marginal note: Admissibility of intercepted communication
 (2)  The contents of a private communication that is obtained from an interception pursuant to subsection (1) are inadmissible as evidence except for the purposes of proceedings in which actual, attempted or threatened bodily harm is alleged, including proceedings in respect of an application for an authorization under this Part or in respect of a search warrant or a warrant for the arrest of any person.

 Marginal note: Destruction of recordings and transcripts
 (3)  The agent of the state who intercepts a private communication pursuant to subsection (1) shall, as soon as is practicable in the circumstances, destroy any recording of the private communication that is obtained from an interception pursuant to subsection (1), any full or partial transcript of the recording and any notes made by that agent of the private communication if nothing in the private communication suggests that bodily harm, attempted bodily harm or threatened bodily harm has occurred or is likely to occur.

 Definition of agent of the state
 (4)  For the purposes of this section, agent of the state means
 (a)  a peace officer; and

 (b)  a person acting under the authority of, or in cooperation with, a peace officer.

 1993, c. 40, s. 4

 Marginal note: Interception with consent
 184.2   (1)  A person may intercept, by means of any electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device, a private communication where either the originator of the private communication or the person intended by the originator to receive it has consented to the interception and an authorization has been obtained pursuant to subsection (3).

 Marginal note: Application for authorization
 (2)  An application for an authorization under this section shall be made by a peace officer, or a public officer who has been appointed or designated to administer or enforce any federal or provincial law and whose duties include the enforcement of this or any other Act of Parliament, ex parte and in writing to a provincial court judge, a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a judge as defined in section 552, and shall be accompanied by an affidavit, which may be sworn on the information and belief of that peace officer or public officer or of any other peace officer or public officer, deposing to the following matters:
 (a)  that there are reasonable grounds to believe that an offence against this or any other Act of Parliament has been or will be committed;

 (b)  the particulars of the offence;

 (c)  the name of the person who has consented to the interception;

 (d)  the period for which the authorization is requested; and

 (e)  in the case of an application for an authorization where an authorization has previously been granted under this section or section 186, the particulars of the authorization.

 Marginal note: Judge to be satisfied
 (3)  An authorization may be given under this section if the judge to whom the application is made is satisfied that
 (a)  there are reasonable grounds to believe that an offence against this or any other Act of Parliament has been or will be committed;

 (b)  either the originator of the private communication or the person intended by the originator to receive it has consented to the interception; and

 (c)  there are reasonable grounds to believe that information concerning the offence referred to in paragraph (a) will be obtained through the interception sought.

 Marginal note: Content and limitation of authorization
 (4)  An authorization given under this section shall
 (a)  state the offence in respect of which private communications may be intercepted;

 (b)  state the type of private communication that may be intercepted;

 (c)  state the identity of the persons, if known, whose private communications are to be intercepted, generally describe the place at which private communications may be intercepted, if a general description of that place can be given, and generally describe the manner of interception that may be used;

 (d)  contain the terms and conditions that the judge considers advisable in the public interest; and

 (e)  be valid for the period, not exceeding sixty days, set out therein.

 1993, c. 40, s. 4

 Marginal note: Application by means of telecommunication
 184.3   (1)  Notwithstanding section 184.2, an application for an authorization under subsection 184.2(2) may be made ex parte to a provincial court judge, a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a judge as defined in section 552, by telephone or other means of telecommunication, if it would be impracticable in the circumstances for the applicant to appear personally before a judge.

 Marginal note: Application
 (2)  An application for an authorization made under this section shall be on oath and shall be accompanied by a statement that includes the matters referred to in paragraphs 184.2(2)(a) to (e) and that states the circumstances that make it impracticable for the applicant to appear personally before a judge.

 Marginal note: Recording
 (3)  The judge shall record, in writing or otherwise, the application for an authorization made under this section and, on determination of the application, shall cause the writing or recording to be placed in the packet referred to in subsection 187(1) and sealed in that packet, and a recording sealed in a packet shall be treated as if it were a document for the purposes of section 187.

 Marginal note: Oath
 (4)  For the purposes of subsection (2), an oath may be administered by telephone or other means of telecommunication.

 Marginal note: Alternative to oath
 (5)  An applicant who uses a means of telecommunication that produces a writing may, instead of swearing an oath for the purposes of subsection (2), make a statement in writing stating that all matters contained in the application are true to the knowledge or belief of the applicant and such a statement shall be deemed to be a statement made under oath.

 Marginal note: Authorization
 (6)  Where the judge to whom an application is made under this section is satisfied that the circumstances referred to in paragraphs 184.2(3)(a) to (c) exist and that the circumstances referred to in subsection (2) make it impracticable for the applicant to appear personally before a judge, the judge may, on such terms and conditions, if any, as are considered advisable, give an authorization by telephone or other means of telecommunication for a period of up to thirty-six hours.

 Marginal note: Giving authorization
 (7)  Where a judge gives an authorization by telephone or other means of telecommunication, other than a means of telecommunication that produces a writing,
 (a)  the judge shall complete and sign the authorization in writing, noting on its face the time, date and place at which it is given;

 (b)  the applicant shall, on the direction of the judge, complete a facsimile of the authorization in writing, noting on its face the name of the judge who gave it and the time, date and place at which it was given; and

 (c)  the judge shall, as soon as is practicable after the authorization has been given, cause the authorization to be placed in the packet referred to in subsection 187(1) and sealed in that packet.

 Marginal note: Giving authorization where telecommunication produces writing
 (8)  Where a judge gives an authorization by a means of telecommunication that produces a writing, the judge shall
 (a)  complete and sign the authorization in writing, noting on its face the time, date and place at which it is given;

 (b)  transmit the authorization by the means of telecommunication to the applicant, and the copy received by the applicant shall be deemed to be a facsimile referred to in paragraph (7)(b); and

 (c)  as soon as is practicable after the authorization has been given, cause the authorization to be placed in the packet referred to in subsection 187(1) and sealed in that packet.

 1993, c. 40, s. 4

 Marginal note: Interception in exceptional circumstances
 184.4  A peace officer may intercept, by means of any electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device, a private communication where
 (a)  the peace officer believes on reasonable grounds that the urgency of the situation is such that an authorization could not, with reasonable diligence, be obtained under any other provision of this Part;

 (b)  the peace officer believes on reasonable grounds that such an interception is immediately necessary to prevent an unlawful act that would cause serious harm to any person or to property; and

 (c)  either the originator of the private communication or the person intended by the originator to receive it is the person who would perform the act that is likely to cause the harm or is the victim, or intended victim, of the harm.

 1993, c. 40, s. 4

 Marginal note: Interception of radio-based telephone communications
 184.5   (1)  Every person who intercepts, by means of any electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device, maliciously or for gain, a radio-based telephone communication, if the originator of the communication or the person intended by the originator of the communication to receive it is in Canada, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Other provisions to apply
 (2)  Section 183.1, subsection 184(2) and sections 184.1 to 190 and 194 to 196 apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to interceptions of radio-based telephone communications referred to in subsection (1).

 1993, c. 40, s. 4

 Marginal note: One application for authorization sufficient
 184.6  For greater certainty, an application for an authorization under this Part may be made with respect to both private communications and radio-based telephone communications at the same time.
 1993, c. 40, s. 4

 Marginal note: Application for authorization
 185   (1)  An application for an authorization to be given under section 186 shall be made 
 ex parte and in writing to a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a judge as defined in section 552 and shall be signed by the Attorney General of the province in which the application is made or the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness or an agent specially designated in writing for the purposes of this section by
 (a)  the Minister personally or the Deputy Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness personally, if the offence under investigation is one in respect of which proceedings, if any, may be instituted at the instance of the Government of Canada and conducted by or on behalf of the Attorney General of Canada, or

 (b)  the Attorney General of a province personally or the Deputy Attorney General of a province personally, in any other case,

 and shall be accompanied by an affidavit, which may be sworn on the information and belief of a peace officer or public officer deposing to the following matters:
 (c)  the facts relied on to justify the belief that an authorization should be given together with particulars of the offence,

 (d)  the type of private communication proposed to be intercepted,

 (e)  the names, addresses and occupations, if known, of all persons, the interception of whose private communications there are reasonable grounds to believe may assist the investigation of the offence, a general description of the nature and location of the place, if known, at which private communications are proposed to be intercepted and a general description of the manner of interception proposed to be used,

 (f)  the number of instances, if any, on which an application has been made under this section in relation to the offence and a person named in the affidavit pursuant to paragraph (e) and on which the application was withdrawn or no authorization was given, the date on which each application was made and the name of the judge to whom each application was made,

 (g)  the period for which the authorization is requested, and

 (h)  whether other investigative procedures have been tried and have failed or why it appears they are unlikely to succeed or that the urgency of the matter is such that it would be impractical to carry out the investigation of the offence using only other investigative procedures.

 Marginal note: Exception for criminal organizations and terrorist groups
 (1.1)  Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(h), that paragraph does not apply where the application for an authorization is in relation to
 (a)  an offence under section 467.11, 467.12 or 467.13;

 (b)  an offence committed for the benefit of, at the direction of or in association with a criminal organization; or

 (c)  a terrorism offence.

 Marginal note: Extension of period for notification
 (2)  An application for an authorization may be accompanied by an application, personally signed by the Attorney General of the province in which the application for the authorization is made or the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness if the application for the authorization is made by him or on his behalf, to substitute for the period mentioned in subsection 196(1) such longer period not exceeding three years as is set out in the application.

 Marginal note: Where extension to be granted
 (3)  Where an application for an authorization is accompanied by an application referred to in subsection (2), the judge to whom the applications are made shall first consider the application referred to in subsection (2) and where, on the basis of the affidavit in support of the application for the authorization and any other affidavit evidence submitted in support of the application referred to in subsection (2), the judge is of the opinion that the interests of justice warrant the granting of the application, he shall fix a period, not exceeding three years, in substitution for the period mentioned in subsection 196(1).

 Marginal note: Where extension not granted
 (4)  Where the judge to whom an application for an authorization and an application referred to in subsection (2) are made refuses to fix a period in substitution for the period mentioned in subsection 196(1) or where the judge fixes a period in substitution therefor that is less than the period set out in the application referred to in subsection (2), the person appearing before the judge on the application for the authorization may withdraw the application for the authorization and thereupon the judge shall not proceed to consider the application for the authorization or to give the authorization and shall return to the person appearing before him on the application for the authorization both applications and all other material pertaining thereto.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 185
 1993, c. 40, s. 5
 1997, c. 18, s. 8, c. 23, s. 4
 2001, c. 32, s. 5, c. 41, ss. 6, 133
 2005, c. 10, ss. 22, 34

 Marginal note: Judge to be satisfied
 186   (1)  An authorization under this section may be given if the judge to whom the application is made is satisfied
 (a)  that it would be in the best interests of the administration of justice to do so; and

 (b)  that other investigative procedures have been tried and have failed, other investigative procedures are unlikely to succeed or the urgency of the matter is such that it would be impractical to carry out the investigation of the offence using only other investigative procedures.

 Marginal note: Exception for criminal organizations and terrorism offences
 (1.1)  Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(b), that paragraph does not apply where the judge is satisfied that the application for an authorization is in relation to
 (a)  an offence under section 467.11, 467.12 or 467.13;

 (b)  an offence committed for the benefit of, at the direction of or in association with a criminal organization; or

 (c)  a terrorism offence.

 Marginal note: Where authorization not to be given
 (2)  No authorization may be given to intercept a private communication at the office or residence of a solicitor, or at any other place ordinarily used by a solicitor and by other solicitors for the purpose of consultation with clients, unless the judge to whom the application is made is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the solicitor, any other solicitor practising with him, any person employed by him or any other such solicitor or a member of the solicitor’s household has been or is about to become a party to an offence.

 Marginal note: Terms and conditions
 (3)  Where an authorization is given in relation to the interception of private communications at a place described in subsection (2), the judge by whom the authorization is given shall include therein such terms and conditions as he considers advisable to protect privileged communications between solicitors and clients.

 Marginal note: Content and limitation of authorization
 (4)  An authorization shall
 (a)  state the offence in respect of which private communications may be intercepted;

 (b)  state the type of private communication that may be intercepted;

 (c)  state the identity of the persons, if known, whose private communications are to be intercepted, generally describe the place at which private communications may be intercepted, if a general description of that place can be given, and generally describe the manner of interception that may be used;

 (d)  contain such terms and conditions as the judge considers advisable in the public interest; and

 (e)  be valid for the period, not exceeding sixty days, set out therein.

 Marginal note: Persons designated
 (5)  The Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness or the Attorney General, as the case may be, may designate a person or persons who may intercept private communications under authorizations.

 Marginal note: Installation and removal of device
 (5.1)  For greater certainty, an authorization that permits interception by means of an electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device includes the authority to install, maintain or remove the device covertly.

 Marginal note: Removal after expiry of authorization
 (5.2)  On an ex parte application, in writing, supported by affidavit, the judge who gave an authorization referred to in subsection (5.1) or any other judge having jurisdiction to give such an authorization may give a further authorization for the covert removal of the electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device after the expiry of the original authorization
 (a)  under any terms or conditions that the judge considers advisable in the public interest; and

 (b)  during any specified period of not more than sixty days.

 Marginal note: Renewal of authorization
 (6)  Renewals of an authorization may be given by a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a judge as defined in section 552 on receipt by him or her of an 
 ex parte application in writing signed by the Attorney General of the province in which the application is made or the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness — or an agent specially designated in writing for the purposes of section 185 by the Minister or the Attorney General, as the case may be — accompanied by an affidavit of a peace officer or public officer deposing to the following matters:
 (a)  the reason and period for which the renewal is required,

 (b)  full particulars, together with times and dates, when interceptions, if any, were made or attempted under the authorization, and any information that has been obtained by any interception, and

 (c)  the number of instances, if any, on which, to the knowledge and belief of the deponent, an application has been made under this subsection in relation to the same authorization and on which the application was withdrawn or no renewal was given, the date on which each application was made and the name of the judge to whom each application was made,

 and supported by such other information as the judge may require.

 Marginal note: Renewal
 (7)  A renewal of an authorization may be given if the judge to whom the application is made is satisfied that any of the circumstances described in subsection (1) still obtain, but no renewal shall be for a period exceeding sixty days.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 186
 1993, c. 40, s. 6
 1997, c. 23, s. 5
 1999, c. 5, s. 5
 2001, c. 32, s. 6, c. 41, ss. 6.1, 133
 2005, c. 10, ss. 23, 34

 Marginal note: Time limitation in relation to criminal organizations and terrorism offences
 186.1  Notwithstanding paragraphs 184.2(4)(e) and 186(4)(e) and subsection 186(7), an authorization or any renewal of an authorization may be valid for one or more periods specified in the authorization exceeding sixty days, each not exceeding one year, where the authorization is in relation to
 (a)  an offence under section 467.11, 467.12 or 467.13;

 (b)  an offence committed for the benefit of, at the direction of or in association with a criminal organization; or

 (c)  a terrorism offence.

 1997, c. 23, s. 6
 2001, c. 32, s. 7, c. 41, ss. 7, 133

 Marginal note: Manner in which application to be kept secret
 187   (1)  All documents relating to an application made pursuant to any provision of this Part are confidential and, subject to subsection (1.1), shall be placed in a packet and sealed by the judge to whom the application is made immediately on determination of the application, and that packet shall be kept in the custody of the court in a place to which the public has no access or in such other place as the judge may authorize and shall not be dealt with except in accordance with subsections (1.2) to (1.5).

 Marginal note: Exception
 (1.1)  An authorization given under this Part need not be placed in the packet except where, pursuant to subsection 184.3(7) or (8), the original authorization is in the hands of the judge, in which case that judge must place it in the packet and the facsimile remains with the applicant.

 Marginal note: Opening for further applications
 (1.2)  The sealed packet may be opened and its contents removed for the purpose of dealing with an application for a further authorization or with an application for renewal of an authorization.

 Marginal note: Opening on order of judge
 (1.3)  A provincial court judge, a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a judge as defined in section 552 may order that the sealed packet be opened and its contents removed for the purpose of copying and examining the documents contained in the packet.

 Marginal note: Opening on order of trial judge
 (1.4)  A judge or provincial court judge before whom a trial is to be held and who has jurisdiction in the province in which an authorization was given may order that the sealed packet be opened and its contents removed for the purpose of copying and examining the documents contained in the packet if
 (a)  any matter relevant to the authorization or any evidence obtained pursuant to the authorization is in issue in the trial; and

 (b)  the accused applies for such an order for the purpose of consulting the documents to prepare for trial.

 Marginal note: Order for destruction of documents
 (1.5)  Where a sealed packet is opened, its contents shall not be destroyed except pursuant to an order of a judge of the same court as the judge who gave the authorization.

 Marginal note: Order of judge
 (2)  An order under subsection (1.2), (1.3), (1.4) or (1.5) made with respect to documents relating to an application made pursuant to section 185 or subsection 186(6) or 196(2) may only be made after the Attorney General or the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness by whom or on whose authority the application for the authorization to which the order relates was made has been given an opportunity to be heard.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (3)  An order under subsection (1.2), (1.3), (1.4) or (1.5) made with respect to documents relating to an application made pursuant to subsection 184.2(2) or section 184.3 may only be made after the Attorney General has been given an opportunity to be heard.

 Marginal note: Editing of copies
 (4)  Where a prosecution has been commenced and an accused applies for an order for the copying and examination of documents pursuant to subsection (1.3) or (1.4), the judge shall not, notwithstanding those subsections, provide any copy of any document to the accused until the prosecutor has deleted any part of the copy of the document that the prosecutor believes would be prejudicial to the public interest, including any part that the prosecutor believes could
 (a)  compromise the identity of any confidential informant;

 (b)  compromise the nature and extent of ongoing investigations;

 (c)  endanger persons engaged in particular intelligence-gathering techniques and thereby prejudice future investigations in which similar techniques would be used; or

 (d)  prejudice the interests of innocent persons.

 Marginal note: Accused to be provided with copies
 (5)  After the prosecutor has deleted the parts of the copy of the document to be given to the accused under subsection (4), the accused shall be provided with an edited copy of the document.

 Marginal note: Original documents to be returned
 (6)  After the accused has received an edited copy of a document, the prosecutor shall keep a copy of the original document, and an edited copy of the document and the original document shall be returned to the packet and the packet resealed.

 Marginal note: Deleted parts
 (7)  An accused to whom an edited copy of a document has been provided pursuant to subsection (5) may request that the judge before whom the trial is to be held order that any part of the document deleted by the prosecutor be made available to the accused, and the judge shall order that a copy of any part that, in the opinion of the judge, is required in order for the accused to make full answer and defence and for which the provision of a judicial summary would not be sufficient, be made available to the accused.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 187
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 24
 1993, c. 40, s. 7
 2005, c. 10, s. 24

 Marginal note: Applications to specially appointed judges
 188   (1)  Notwithstanding section 185, an application made under that section for an authorization may be made ex parte to a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction, or a judge as defined in section 552, designated from time to time by the Chief Justice, by a peace officer specially designated in writing, by name or otherwise, for the purposes of this section by
 (a)  the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, if the offence is one in respect of which proceedings, if any, may be instituted by the Government of Canada and conducted by or on behalf of the Attorney General of Canada, or

 (b)  the Attorney General of a province, in respect of any other offence in the province,

 if the urgency of the situation requires interception of private communications to commence before an authorization could, with reasonable diligence, be obtained under section 186.

 Marginal note: Authorizations in emergency
 (2)  Where the judge to whom an application is made pursuant to subsection (1) is satisfied that the urgency of the situation requires that interception of private communications commence before an authorization could, with reasonable diligence, be obtained under section 186, he may, on such terms and conditions, if any, as he considers advisable, give an authorization in writing for a period of up to thirty-six hours.

 (3)   [Repealed, 1993, c. 40, s. 8]

 Definition of Chief Justice
 (4)  In this section, Chief Justice means
 (a)  in the Province of Ontario, the Chief Justice of the Ontario Court;

 (b)  in the Province of Quebec, the Chief Justice of the Superior Court;

 (c)  in the Provinces of Nova Scotia and British Columbia, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court;

 (d)  in the Provinces of New Brunswick, Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta, the Chief Justice of the Court of Queen’s Bench;

 (e)  in the Provinces of Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Trial Division; and

 (f)  in Yukon, the Northwest Territories and Nunavut, the senior judge within the meaning of subsection 22(3) of the Judges Act .

 Marginal note: Inadmissibility of evidence
 (5)  The trial judge may deem inadmissible the evidence obtained by means of an interception of a private communication pursuant to a subsequent authorization given under this section, where he finds that the application for the subsequent authorization was based on the same facts, and involved the interception of the private communications of the same person or persons, or related to the same offence, on which the application for the original authorization was based.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 188
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), ss. 25, 185(F), c. 27 (2nd Supp.), s. 10
 1990, c. 17, s. 10
 1992, c. 1, s. 58, c. 51, s. 35
 1993, c. 40, s. 8
 1999, c. 3, s. 28
 2002, c. 7, s. 140
 2005, c. 10, s. 34

 Marginal note: Execution of authorizations
 188.1   (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the interception of a private communication authorized pursuant to section 184.2, 184.3, 186 or 188 may be carried out anywhere in Canada.

 Marginal note: Execution in another province
 (2)  Where an authorization is given under section 184.2, 184.3, 186 or 188 in one province but it may reasonably be expected that it is to be executed in another province and the execution of the authorization would require entry into or upon the property of any person in the other province or would require that an order under section 487.02 be made with respect to any person in that other province, a judge in the other province may, on application, confirm the authorization and when the authorization is so confirmed, it shall have full force and effect in that other province as though it had originally been given in that other province.

 1993, c. 40, s. 9

 Marginal note: No civil or criminal liability
 188.2  No person who acts in accordance with an authorization or under section 184.1 or 184.4 or who aids, in good faith, a person who he or she believes on reasonable grounds is acting in accordance with an authorization or under one of those sections incurs any criminal or civil liability for anything reasonably done further to the authorization or to that section.
 1993, c. 40, s. 9

 189   (1) to (4)   [Repealed, 1993, c. 40, s. 10]

 Marginal note: Notice of intention to produce evidence
 (5)  The contents of a private communication that is obtained from an interception of the private communication pursuant to any provision of, or pursuant to an authorization given under, this Part shall not be received in evidence unless the party intending to adduce it has given to the accused reasonable notice of the intention together with
 (a)  a transcript of the private communication, where it will be adduced in the form of a recording, or a statement setting out full particulars of the private communication, where evidence of the private communication will be given viva voce ; and

 (b)  a statement respecting the time, place and date of the private communication and the parties thereto, if known.

 Marginal note: Privileged evidence
 (6)  Any information obtained by an interception that, but for the interception, would have been privileged remains privileged and inadmissible as evidence without the consent of the person enjoying the privilege.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 189
 1993, c. 40, s. 10

 Marginal note: Further particulars
 190  Where an accused has been given notice pursuant to subsection 189(5), any judge of the court in which the trial of the accused is being or is to be held may at any time order that further particulars be given of the private communication that is intended to be adduced in evidence.
 1973-74, c. 50, s. 2

 Marginal note: Possession, etc.
 191   (1)  Every one who possesses, sells or purchases any electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device or any component thereof knowing that the design thereof renders it primarily useful for surreptitious interception of private communications is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Exemptions
 (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to
 (a)  a police officer or police constable in possession of a device or component described in subsection (1) in the course of his employment;

 (b)  a person in possession of such a device or component for the purpose of using it in an interception made or to be made in accordance with an authorization;

 (b.1)  a person in possession of such a device or component under the direction of a police officer or police constable in order to assist that officer or constable in the course of his duties as a police officer or police constable;

 (c)  an officer or a servant of Her Majesty in right of Canada or a member of the Canadian Forces in possession of such a device or component in the course of his duties as such an officer, servant or member, as the case may be; and

 (d)  any other person in possession of such a device or component under the authority of a licence issued by the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness.

 Marginal note: Terms and conditions of licence
 (3)  A licence issued for the purpose of paragraph (2)(d) may contain such terms and conditions relating to the possession, sale or purchase of a device or component described in subsection (1) as the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness may prescribe.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 191
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 26
 2005, c. 10, s. 34

 Marginal note: Forfeiture
 192   (1)  Where a person is convicted of an offence under section 184 or 191, any electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device by means of which the offence was committed or the possession of which constituted the offence, on the conviction, in addition to any punishment that is imposed, may be ordered forfeited to Her Majesty whereupon it may be disposed of as the Attorney General directs.

 Marginal note: Limitation
 (2)  No order for forfeiture shall be made under subsection (1) in respect of telephone, telegraph or other communication facilities or equipment owned by a person engaged in providing telephone, telegraph or other communication service to the public or forming part of the telephone, telegraph or other communication service or system of that person by means of which an offence under section 184 has been committed if that person was not a party to the offence.

 1973-74, c. 50, s. 2

 Marginal note: Disclosure of information
 193   (1)  Where a private communication has been intercepted by means of an electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device without the consent, express or implied, of the originator thereof or of the person intended by the originator thereof to receive it, every one who, without the express consent of the originator thereof or of the person intended by the originator thereof to receive it, wilfully
 (a)  uses or discloses the private communication or any part thereof or the substance, meaning or purport thereof or of any part thereof, or

 (b)  discloses the existence thereof,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Exemptions
 (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to a person who discloses a private communication or any part thereof or the substance, meaning or purport thereof or of any part thereof or who discloses the existence of a private communication
 (a)  in the course of or for the purpose of giving evidence in any civil or criminal proceedings or in any other proceedings in which the person may be required to give evidence on oath;

 (b)  in the course of or for the purpose of any criminal investigation if the private communication was lawfully intercepted;

 (c)  in giving notice under section 189 or furnishing further particulars pursuant to an order under section 190;

 (d)  in the course of the operation of
 (i)  a telephone, telegraph or other communication service to the public,

 (ii)  a department or an agency of the Government of Canada, or

 (iii)  services relating to the management or protection of a computer system, as defined in subsection 342.1(2),

 if the disclosure is necessarily incidental to an interception described in paragraph 184(2)(c), (d) or (e);

 (e)  where disclosure is made to a peace officer or prosecutor in Canada or to a person or authority with responsibility in a foreign state for the investigation or prosecution of offences and is intended to be in the interests of the administration of justice in Canada or elsewhere; or

 (f)  where the disclosure is made to the Director of the Canadian Security Intelligence Service or to an employee of the Service for the purpose of enabling the Service to perform its duties and functions under section 12 of the Canadian Security Intelligence Service Act .

 Marginal note: Publishing of prior lawful disclosure
 (3)  Subsection (1) does not apply to a person who discloses a private communication or any part thereof or the substance, meaning or purport thereof or of any part thereof or who discloses the existence of a private communication where that which is disclosed by him was, prior to the disclosure, lawfully disclosed in the course of or for the purpose of giving evidence in proceedings referred to in paragraph (2)(a).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 193
 R.S., 1985, c. 30 (4th Supp.), s. 45
 1993, c. 40, s. 11
 2004, c. 12, s. 5

 Marginal note: Disclosure of information received from interception of radio-based telephone communications
 193.1   (1)  Every person who wilfully uses or discloses a radio-based telephone communication or who wilfully discloses the existence of such a communication is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, if
 (a)  the originator of the communication or the person intended by the originator of the communication to receive it was in Canada when the communication was made;

 (b)  the communication was intercepted by means of an electromagnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device without the consent, express or implied, of the originator of the communication or of the person intended by the originator to receive the communication; and

 (c)  the person does not have the express or implied consent of the originator of the communication or of the person intended by the originator to receive the communication.

 Marginal note: Other provisions to apply
 (2)  Subsections 193(2) and (3) apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to disclosures of radio-based telephone communications.

 1993, c. 40, s. 12

 Marginal note: Damages
 194   (1)  Subject to subsection (2), a court that convicts an accused of an offence under section 184, 184.5, 193 or 193.1 may, on the application of a person aggrieved, at the time sentence is imposed, order the accused to pay to that person an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars as punitive damages.

 Marginal note: No damages where civil proceedings commenced
 (2)  No amount shall be ordered to be paid under subsection (1) to a person who has commenced an action under Part II of the Crown Liability Act .

 Marginal note: Judgment may be registered
 (3)  Where an amount that is ordered to be paid under subsection (1) is not paid forthwith, the applicant may, by filing the order, enter as a judgment, in the superior court of the province in which the trial was held, the amount ordered to be paid, and that judgment is enforceable against the accused in the same manner as if it were a judgment rendered against the accused in that court in civil proceedings.

 Marginal note: Moneys in possession of accused may be taken
 (4)  All or any part of an amount that is ordered to be paid under subsection (1) may be taken out of moneys found in the possession of the accused at the time of his arrest, except where there is a dispute respecting ownership of or right of possession to those moneys by claimants other than the accused.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 194
 1993, c. 40, s. 13

 Marginal note: Annual report
 195   (1)  The Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness shall, as soon as possible after the end of each year, prepare a report relating to
 (a)  authorizations for which he and agents to be named in the report who were specially designated in writing by him for the purposes of section 185 made application, and

 (b)  authorizations given under section 188 for which peace officers to be named in the report who were specially designated by him for the purposes of that section made application,

 and interceptions made thereunder in the immediately preceding year.

 Marginal note: Information respecting authorizations
 (2)  The report referred to in subsection (1) shall, in relation to authorizations and interceptions made thereunder, set out
 (a)  the number of applications made for authorizations;

 (b)  the number of applications made for renewal of authorizations;

 (c)  the number of applications referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) that were granted, the number of those applications that were refused and the number of applications referred to in paragraph (a) that were granted subject to terms and conditions;

 (d)  the number of persons identified in an authorization against whom proceedings were commenced at the instance of the Attorney General of Canada in respect of
 (i)  an offence specified in the authorization,

 (ii)  an offence other than an offence specified in the authorization but in respect of which an authorization may be given, and

 (iii)  an offence in respect of which an authorization may not be given;

 (e)  the number of persons not identified in an authorization against whom proceedings were commenced at the instance of the Attorney General of Canada in respect of
 (i)  an offence specified in such an authorization,

 (ii)  an offence other than an offence specified in such an authorization but in respect of which an authorization may be given, and

 (iii)  an offence other than an offence specified in such an authorization and for which no such authorization may be given,

 and whose commission or alleged commission of the offence became known to a peace officer as a result of an interception of a private communication under an authorization;

 (f)  the average period for which authorizations were given and for which renewals thereof were granted;

 (g)  the number of authorizations that, by virtue of one or more renewals thereof, were valid for more than sixty days, for more than one hundred and twenty days, for more than one hundred and eighty days and for more than two hundred and forty days;

 (h)  the number of notifications given pursuant to section 196;

 (i)  the offences in respect of which authorizations were given, specifying the number of authorizations given in respect of each of those offences;

 (j)  a description of all classes of places specified in authorizations and the number of authorizations in which each of those classes of places was specified;

 (k)  a general description of the methods of interception involved in each interception under an authorization;

 (l)  the number of persons arrested whose identity became known to a peace officer as a result of an interception under an authorization;

 (m)  the number of criminal proceedings commenced at the instance of the Attorney General of Canada in which private communications obtained by interception under an authorization were adduced in evidence and the number of those proceedings that resulted in a conviction; and

 (n)  the number of criminal investigations in which information obtained as a result of the interception of a private communication under an authorization was used although the private communication was not adduced in evidence in criminal proceedings commenced at the instance of the Attorney General of Canada as a result of the investigations.

 Marginal note: Other information
 (3)  The report referred to in subsection (1) shall, in addition to the information referred to in subsection (2), set out
 (a)  the number of prosecutions commenced against officers or servants of Her Majesty in right of Canada or members of the Canadian Forces for offences under section 184 or 193; and

 (b)  a general assessment of the importance of interception of private communications for the investigation, detection, prevention and prosecution of offences in Canada.

 Marginal note: Report to be laid before Parliament
 (4)  The Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness shall cause a copy of each report prepared by him under subsection (1) to be laid before Parliament forthwith on completion thereof, or if Parliament is not then sitting, on any of the first fifteen days next thereafter that Parliament is sitting.

 Marginal note: Report by Attorneys General
 (5)  The Attorney General of each province shall, as soon as possible after the end of each year, prepare and publish or otherwise make available to the public a report relating to
 (a)  authorizations for which he and agents specially designated in writing by him for the purposes of section 185 made application, and

 (b)  authorizations given under section 188 for which peace officers specially designated by him for the purposes of that section made application,

 and interceptions made thereunder in the immediately preceding year setting out, with such modifications as the circumstances require, the information described in subsections (2) and (3).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 195
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 27
 2005, c. 10, s. 34

 Marginal note: Written notification to be given
 196   (1)  The Attorney General of the province in which an application under subsection 185(1) was made or the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness if the application was made by or on behalf of that Minister shall, within 90 days after the period for which the authorization was given or renewed or within such other period as is fixed pursuant to subsection 185(3) or subsection (3) of this section, notify in writing the person who was the object of the interception pursuant to the authorization and shall, in a manner prescribed by regulations made by the Governor in Council, certify to the court that gave the authorization that the person has been so notified.

 Marginal note: Extension of period for notification
 (2)  The running of the 90 days referred to in subsection (1), or of any other period fixed pursuant to subsection 185(3) or subsection (3) of this section, is suspended until any application made by the Attorney General or the Minister to a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a judge as defined in section 552 for an extension or a subsequent extension of the period for which the authorization was given or renewed has been heard and disposed of.

 Marginal note: Where extension to be granted
 (3)  Where the judge to whom an application referred to in subsection (2) is made, on the basis of an affidavit submitted in support of the application, is satisfied that
 (a)  the investigation of the offence to which the authorization relates, or

 (b)  a subsequent investigation of an offence listed in section 183 commenced as a result of information obtained from the investigation referred to in paragraph (a),

 is continuing and is of the opinion that the interests of justice warrant the granting of the application, the judge shall grant an extension, or a subsequent extension, of the period, each extension not to exceed three years.

 Marginal note: Application to be accompanied by affidavit
 (4)  An application pursuant to subsection (2) shall be accompanied by an affidavit deposing to
 (a)  the facts known or believed by the deponent and relied on to justify the belief that an extension should be granted; and

 (b)  the number of instances, if any, on which an application has, to the knowledge or belief of the deponent, been made under that subsection in relation to the particular authorization and on which the application was withdrawn or the application was not granted, the date on which each application was made and the judge to whom each application was made.

 Marginal note: Exception for criminal organizations and terrorist groups
 (5)  Notwithstanding subsections (3) and 185(3), where the judge to whom an application referred to in subsection (2) or 185(2) is made, on the basis of an affidavit submitted in support of the application, is satisfied that the investigation is in relation to
 (a)  an offence under section 467.11, 467.12 or 467.13,

 (b)  an offence committed for the benefit of, at the direction of or in association with a criminal organization, or

 (c)  a terrorism offence,

 and is of the opinion that the interests of justice warrant the granting of the application, the judge shall grant an extension, or a subsequent extension, of the period, but no extension may exceed three years.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 196
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 28
 1993, c. 40, s. 14
 1997, c. 23, s. 7
 2001, c. 32, s. 8, c. 41, ss. 8, 133
 2005, c. 10, s. 25

 PART VII Disorderly Houses, Gaming and Betting
 Interpretation
 Marginal note: Definitions
 197   (1)  In this Part,
 bet
 pari
 bet means a bet that is placed on any contingency or event that is to take place in or out of Canada, and without restricting the generality of the foregoing, includes a bet that is placed on any contingency relating to a horse-race, fight, match or sporting event that is to take place in or out of Canada; ( pari )
 common bawdy-house
 maison de débauche
 common bawdy-house means a place that is
 (a)  kept or occupied, or

 (b)  resorted to by one or more persons

 for the purpose of prostitution or the practice of acts of indecency; ( maison de débauche )
 common betting house
 maison de pari
 common betting house means a place that is opened, kept or used for the purpose of
 (a)  enabling, encouraging or assisting persons who resort thereto to bet between themselves or with the keeper, or

 (b)  enabling any person to receive, record, register, transmit or pay bets or to announce the results of betting; ( maison de pari )

 common gaming house
 maison de jeu
 common gaming house means a place that is
 (a)  kept for gain to which persons resort for the purpose of playing games, or

 (b)  kept or used for the purpose of playing games
 (i)  in which a bank is kept by one or more but not all of the players,

 (ii)  in which all or any portion of the bets on or proceeds from a game is paid, directly or indirectly, to the keeper of the place,

 (iii)  in which, directly or indirectly, a fee is charged to or paid by the players for the privilege of playing or participating in a game or using gaming equipment, or

 (iv)  in which the chances of winning are not equally favourable to all persons who play the game, including the person, if any, who conducts the game; ( maison de jeu )

 disorderly house
 maison de désordre
 disorderly house means a common bawdy-house, a common betting house or a common gaming house; ( maison de désordre )
 game
 jeu
 game means a game of chance or mixed chance and skill; ( jeu )
 gaming equipment
 matériel de jeu
 gaming equipment means anything that is or may be used for the purpose of playing games or for betting; ( matériel de jeu )
 keeper
 tenancier
 keeper includes a person who
 (a)  is an owner or occupier of a place,

 (b)  assists or acts on behalf of an owner or occupier of a place,

 (c)  appears to be, or to assist or act on behalf of an owner or occupier of a place,

 (d)  has the care or management of a place, or

 (e)  uses a place permanently or temporarily, with or without the consent of the owner or occupier thereof; ( tenancier )

 place
 local ou endroit
 place includes any place, whether or not
 (a)  it is covered or enclosed,

 (b)  it is used permanently or temporarily, or

 (c)  any person has an exclusive right of user with respect to it; ( local ou endroit )

 prostitute
 prostitué
 prostitute means a person of either sex who engages in prostitution; ( prostitué )
 public place
 endroit public
 public place includes any place to which the public have access as of right or by invitation, express or implied. ( endroit public )

 Marginal note: Exception
 (2)  A place is not a common gaming house within the meaning of paragraph (a) or subparagraph (b)(ii) or (iii) of the definition common gaming house in subsection (1) while it is occupied and used by an incorporated genuine social club or branch thereof, if
 (a)  the whole or any portion of the bets on or proceeds from games played therein is not directly or indirectly paid to the keeper thereof; and

 (b)  no fee is charged to persons for the right or privilege of participating in the games played therein other than under the authority of and in accordance with the terms of a licence issued by the Attorney General of the province in which the place is situated or by such other person or authority in the province as may be specified by the Attorney General thereof.

 Marginal note: Onus
 (3)  The onus of proving that, by virtue of subsection (2), a place is not a common gaming house is on the accused.

 Marginal note: Effect when game partly played on premises
 (4)  A place may be a common gaming house notwithstanding that
 (a)  it is used for the purpose of playing part of a game and another part of the game is played elsewhere;

 (b)  the stake that is played for is in some other place; or

 (c)  it is used on only one occasion in the manner described in paragraph (b) of the definition common gaming house in subsection (1), if the keeper or any person acting on behalf of or in concert with the keeper has used another place on another occasion in the manner described in that paragraph.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 197
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 29

 Presumptions
 Marginal note: Presumptions
 198   (1)  In proceedings under this Part,
 (a)  evidence that a peace officer who was authorized to enter a place was wilfully prevented from entering or was wilfully obstructed or delayed in entering is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that the place is a disorderly house;

 (b)  evidence that a place was found to be equipped with gaming equipment or any device for concealing, removing or destroying gaming equipment is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that the place is a common gaming house or a common betting house, as the case may be;

 (c)  evidence that gaming equipment was found in a place entered under a warrant issued pursuant to this Part, or on or about the person of anyone found therein, is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that the place is a common gaming house and that the persons found therein were playing games, whether or not any person acting under the warrant observed any persons playing games therein; and

 (d)  evidence that a person was convicted of keeping a disorderly house is, for the purpose of proceedings against any one who is alleged to have been an inmate or to have been found in that house at the time the person committed the offence of which he was convicted, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that the house was, at that time, a disorderly house.

 Marginal note: Conclusive presumption from slot machine
 (2)  For the purpose of proceedings under this Part, a place that is found to be equipped with a slot machine shall be conclusively presumed to be a common gaming house.

 Definition of slot machine
 (3)  In subsection (2), slot machine means any automatic machine or slot machine
 (a)  that is used or intended to be used for any purpose other than vending merchandise or services, or

 (b)  that is used or intended to be used for the purpose of vending merchandise or services if
 (i)  the result of one of any number of operations of the machine is a matter of chance or uncertainty to the operator,

 (ii)  as a result of a given number of successive operations by the operator the machine produces different results, or

 (iii)  on any operation of the machine it discharges or emits a slug or token,

 but does not include an automatic machine or slot machine that dispenses as prizes only one or more free games on that machine.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 180
 1974-75-76, c. 93, s. 10

 Search
 Marginal note: Warrant to search
 199   (1)  A justice who is satisfied by information on oath that there are reasonable grounds to believe that an offence under section 201, 202, 203, 206, 207 or 210 is being committed at any place within the jurisdiction of the justice may issue a warrant authorizing a peace officer to enter and search the place by day or night and seize anything found therein that may be evidence that an offence under section 201, 202, 203, 206, 207 or 210, as the case may be, is being committed at that place, and to take into custody all persons who are found in or at that place and requiring those persons and things to be brought before that justice or before another justice having jurisdiction, to be dealt with according to law.

 Marginal note: Search without warrant, seizure and arrest
 (2)  A peace officer may, whether or not he is acting under a warrant issued pursuant to this section, take into custody any person whom he finds keeping a common gaming house and any person whom he finds therein, and may seize anything that may be evidence that such an offence is being committed and shall bring those persons and things before a justice having jurisdiction, to be dealt with according to law.

 Marginal note: Disposal of property seized
 (3)  Except where otherwise expressly provided by law, a court, judge, justice or provincial court judge before whom anything that is seized under this section is brought may declare that the thing is forfeited, in which case it shall be disposed of or dealt with as the Attorney General may direct if no person shows sufficient cause why it should not be forfeited.

 Marginal note: When declaration or direction may be made
 (4)  No declaration or direction shall be made pursuant to subsection (3) in respect of anything seized under this section until
 (a)  it is no longer required as evidence in any proceedings that are instituted pursuant to the seizure; or

 (b)  the expiration of thirty days from the time of seizure where it is not required as evidence in any proceedings.

 Marginal note: Conversion into money
 (5)  The Attorney General may, for the purpose of converting anything forfeited under this section into money, deal with it in all respects as if he were the owner thereof.

 Marginal note: Telephones exempt from seizure
 (6)  Nothing in this section or in section 489 authorizes the seizure, forfeiture or destruction of telephone, telegraph or other communication facilities or equipment that may be evidence of or that may have been used in the commission of an offence under section 201, 202, 203, 206, 207 or 210 and that is owned by a person engaged in providing telephone, telegraph or other communication service to the public or forming part of the telephone, telegraph or other communication service or system of that person.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (7)  Subsection (6) does not apply to prohibit the seizure, for use as evidence, of any facility or equipment described in that subsection that is designed or adapted to record a communication.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 199
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 203
 1994, c. 44, s. 10

 Obstruction
 200   [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 30]
 Gaming and Betting
 Marginal note: Keeping gaming or betting house
 201   (1)  Every one who keeps a common gaming house or common betting house is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Person found in or owner permitting use
 (2)  Every one who
 (a)  is found, without lawful excuse, in a common gaming house or common betting house, or

 (b)  as owner, landlord, lessor, tenant, occupier or agent, knowingly permits a place to be let or used for the purposes of a common gaming house or common betting house,

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 185

 Marginal note: Betting, pool-selling, book-making, etc.
 202   (1)  Every one commits an offence who
 (a)  uses or knowingly allows a place under his control to be used for the purpose of recording or registering bets or selling a pool;

 (b)  imports, makes, buys, sells, rents, leases, hires or keeps, exhibits, employs or knowingly allows to be kept, exhibited or employed in any place under his control any device or apparatus for the purpose of recording or registering bets or selling a pool, or any machine or device for gambling or betting;

 (c)  has under his control any money or other property relating to a transaction that is an offence under this section;

 (d)  records or registers bets or sells a pool;

 (e)  engages in book-making or pool-selling, or in the business or occupation of betting, or makes any agreement for the purchase or sale of betting or gaming privileges, or for the purchase or sale of information that is intended to assist in book-making, pool-selling or betting;

 (f)  prints, provides or offers to print or provide information intended for use in connection with book-making, pool-selling or betting on any horse-race, fight, game or sport, whether or not it takes place in or outside Canada or has or has not taken place;

 (g)  imports or brings into Canada any information or writing that is intended or is likely to promote or be of use in gambling, book-making, pool-selling or betting on a horse-race, fight, game or sport, and where this paragraph applies it is immaterial
 (i)  whether the information is published before, during or after the race, fight game or sport, or

 (ii)  whether the race, fight, game or sport takes place in Canada or elsewhere,

 but this paragraph does not apply to a newspaper, magazine or other periodical published in good faith primarily for a purpose other than the publication of such information;

 (h)  advertises, prints, publishes, exhibits, posts up, or otherwise gives notice of any offer, invitation or inducement to bet on, to guess or to foretell the result of a contest, or a result of or contingency relating to any contest;

 (i)  wilfully and knowingly sends, transmits, delivers or receives any message by radio, telegraph, telephone, mail or express that conveys any information relating to book-making, pool-selling, betting or wagering, or that is intended to assist in book-making, pool-selling, betting or wagering; or

 (j)  aids or assists in any manner in anything that is an offence under this section.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits an offence under this section is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  for a first offence, to imprisonment for not more than two years;

 (b)  for a second offence, to imprisonment for not more than two years and not less than fourteen days; and

 (c)  for each subsequent offence, to imprisonment for not more than two years and not less than three months.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 186
 1974-75-76, c. 93, s. 11

 Marginal note: Placing bets on behalf of others
 203  Every one who
 (a)  places or offers or agrees to place a bet on behalf of another person for a consideration paid or to be paid by or on behalf of that other person,

 (b)  engages in the business or practice of placing or agreeing to place bets on behalf of other persons, whether for a consideration or otherwise, or

 (c)  holds himself out or allows himself to be held out as engaging in the business or practice of placing or agreeing to place bets on behalf of other persons, whether for a consideration or otherwise,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (d)  for a first offence, to imprisonment for not more than two years,

 (e)  for a second offence, to imprisonment for not more than two years and not less than fourteen days, and

 (f)  for each subsequent offence, to imprisonment for not more than two years and not less than three months.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 187
 1974-75-76, c. 93, s. 11

 Marginal note: Exemption
 204   (1)  Sections 201 and 202 do not apply to
 (a)  any person or association by reason of his or their becoming the custodian or depository of any money, property or valuable thing staked, to be paid to
 (i)  the winner of a lawful race, sport, game or exercise,

 (ii)  the owner of a horse engaged in a lawful race, or

 (iii)  the winner of any bets between not more than ten individuals;

 (b)  a private bet between individuals not engaged in any way in the business of betting;

 (c)  bets made or records of bets made through the agency of a pari-mutuel system on running, trotting or pacing horse-races if
 (i)  the bets or records of bets are made on the race-course of an association in respect of races conducted at that race-course or another race-course in or out of Canada, and, in the case of a race conducted on a race-course situated outside Canada, the governing body that regulates the race has been certified as acceptable by the Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food or a person designated by that Minister pursuant to subsection (8.1) and that Minister or person has permitted pari-mutuel betting in Canada on the race pursuant to that subsection, and

 (ii)  the provisions of this section and the regulations are complied with.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (1.1)  For greater certainty, a person may, in accordance with the regulations, do anything described in section 201 or 202, if the person does it for the purposes of legal pari-mutuel betting.

 Marginal note: Presumption
 (2)  For the purposes of paragraph 1(c), bets made, in accordance with the regulations, in a betting theatre referred to in paragraph (8)(e), or by telephone calls to the race-course of an association or to such a betting theatre, are deemed to be made on the race-course of the association.

 Marginal note: Operation of pari-mutuel system
 (3)  No person or association shall use a pari-mutuel system of betting in respect of a horse-race unless the system has been approved by and its operation is carried on under the supervision of an officer appointed by the Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food.

 Marginal note: Supervision of pari-mutuel system
 (4)  Every person or association operating a pari-mutuel system of betting in accordance with this section in respect of a horse-race, whether or not the person or association is conducting the race-meeting at which the race is run, shall pay to the Receiver General in respect of each individual pool of the race and each individual feature pool one-half of one per cent, or such greater fraction not exceeding one per cent as may be fixed by the Governor in Council, of the total amount of money that is bet through the agency of the pari-mutuel system of betting.

 Marginal note: Percentage that may be deducted and retained
 (5)  Where any person or association becomes a custodian or depository of any money, bet or stakes under a pari-mutuel system in respect of a horse-race, that person or association shall not deduct or retain any amount from the total amount of money, bets or stakes unless it does so pursuant to subsection (6).

 Marginal note: Percentage that may be deducted and retained
 (6)  An association operating a pari-mutuel system of betting in accordance with this section in respect of a horse-race, or any other association or person acting on its behalf, may deduct and retain from the total amount of money that is bet through the agency of the pari-mutuel system, in respect of each individual pool of each race or each individual feature pool, a percentage not exceeding the percentage prescribed by the regulations plus any odd cents over any multiple of five cents in the amount calculated in accordance with the regulations to be payable in respect of each dollar bet.

 Marginal note: Stopping of betting
 (7)  Where an officer appointed by the Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food is not satisfied that the provisions of this section and the regulations are being carried out in good faith by any person or association in relation to a race meeting, he may, at any time, order any betting in relation to the race meeting to be stopped for any period that he considers proper.

 Marginal note: Regulations
 (8)  The Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food may make regulations
 (a)  prescribing the maximum number of races for each race-course on which a race meeting is conducted, in respect of which a pari-mutuel system of betting may be used for the race meeting or on any one calendar day during the race meeting, and the circumstances in which the Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food or a person designated by him for that purpose may approve of the use of that system in respect of additional races on any race-course for a particular race meeting or on a particular day during the race meeting;

 (b)  prohibiting any person or association from using a pari-mutuel system of betting for any race-course on which a race meeting is conducted in respect of more than the maximum number of races prescribed pursuant to paragraph (a) and the additional races, if any, in respect of which the use of a pari-mutuel system of betting has been approved pursuant to that paragraph;

 (c)  prescribing the maximum percentage that may be deducted and retained pursuant to subsection (6) by or on behalf of a person or association operating a pari-mutuel system of betting in respect of a horse-race in accordance with this section and providing for the determination of the percentage that each such person or association may deduct and retain;

 (d)  respecting pari-mutuel betting in Canada on horse-races conducted on a race-course situated outside Canada; and

 (e)  authorizing pari-mutuel betting and governing the conditions for pari-mutuel betting, including the granting of licences therefor, that is conducted by an association in a betting theatre owned or leased by the association in a province in which the Lieutenant Governor in Council, or such other person or authority in the province as may be specified by the Lieutenant Governor in Council thereof, has issued a licence to that association for the betting theatre.

 Marginal note: Approvals
 (8.1)  The Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food or a person designated by that Minister may, with respect to a horse-race conducted on a race-course situated outside Canada,
 (a)  certify as acceptable, for the purposes of this section, the governing body that regulates the race; and

 (b)  permit pari-mutuel betting in Canada on the race.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (9)  The Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food may make regulations respecting
 (a)  the supervision and operation of pari-mutuel systems related to race meetings, and the fixing of the dates on which and the places at which an association may conduct those meetings;

 (b)  the method of calculating the amount payable in respect of each dollar bet;

 (c)  the conduct of race-meetings in relation to the supervision and operation of pari-mutuel systems, including photo-finishes, video patrol and the testing of bodily substances taken from horses entered in a race at such meetings, including, in the case of a horse that dies while engaged in racing or immediately before or after the race, the testing of any tissue taken from its body;

 (d)  the prohibition, restriction or regulation of
 (i)  the possession of drugs or medicaments or of equipment used in the administering of drugs or medicaments at or near race-courses, or

 (ii)  the administering of drugs or medicaments to horses participating in races run at a race meeting during which a pari-mutuel system of betting is used; and

 (e)  the provision, equipment and maintenance of accommodation, services or other facilities for the proper supervision and operation of pari-mutuel systems related to race meetings, by associations conducting those meetings or by other associations.

 Marginal note: 900 metre zone
 (9.1)  For the purposes of this section, the Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food may designate, with respect to any race-course, a zone that shall be deemed to be part of the race-course, if
 (a)  the zone is immediately adjacent to the race-course;

 (b)  the farthest point of that zone is not more than 900 metres from the nearest point on the race track of the race-course; and

 (c)  all real property situated in that zone is owned or leased by the person or association that owns or leases the race-course.

 Marginal note: Contravention
 (10)  Every person who contravenes or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this section or of any regulations made under this section is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Definition of association
 (11)  For the purposes of this section, association means an association incorporated by or pursuant to an Act of Parliament or of the legislature of a province that owns or leases a race-course and conducts horse-races in the ordinary course of its business and, to the extent that the applicable legislation requires that the purposes of the association be expressly stated in its constating instrument, having as one of its purposes the conduct of horse-races.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 204
 R.S., 1985, c. 47 (1st Supp.), s. 1
 1989, c. 2, s. 1
 1994, c. 38, ss. 14, 25

 205   [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 52 (1st Supp.), s. 1]
 Marginal note: Offence in relation to lotteries and games of chance
 206   (1)  Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years who
 (a)  makes, prints, advertises or publishes, or causes or procures to be made, printed, advertised or published, any proposal, scheme or plan for advancing, lending, giving, selling or in any way disposing of any property by lots, cards, tickets or any mode of chance whatever;

 (b)  sells, barters, exchanges or otherwise disposes of, or causes or procures, or aids or assists in, the sale, barter, exchange or other disposal of, or offers for sale, barter or exchange, any lot, card, ticket or other means or device for advancing, lending, giving, selling or otherwise disposing of any property by lots, tickets or any mode of chance whatever;

 (c)  knowingly sends, transmits, mails, ships, delivers or allows to be sent, transmitted, mailed, shipped or delivered, or knowingly accepts for carriage or transport or conveys any article that is used or intended for use in carrying out any device, proposal, scheme or plan for advancing, lending, giving, selling or otherwise disposing of any property by any mode of chance whatever;

 (d)  conducts or manages any scheme, contrivance or operation of any kind for the purpose of determining who, or the holders of what lots, tickets, numbers or chances, are the winners of any property so proposed to be advanced, lent, given, sold or disposed of;

 (e)  conducts, manages or is a party to any scheme, contrivance or operation of any kind by which any person, on payment of any sum of money, or the giving of any valuable security, or by obligating himself to pay any sum of money or give any valuable security, shall become entitled under the scheme, contrivance or operation to receive from the person conducting or managing the scheme, contrivance or operation, or any other person, a larger sum of money or amount of valuable security than the sum or amount paid or given, or to be paid or given, by reason of the fact that other persons have paid or given, or obligated themselves to pay or give any sum of money or valuable security under the scheme, contrivance or operation;

 (f)  disposes of any goods, wares or merchandise by any game of chance or any game of mixed chance and skill in which the contestant or competitor pays money or other valuable consideration;

 (g)  induces any person to stake or hazard any money or other valuable property or thing on the result of any dice game, three-card monte, punch board, coin table or on the operation of a wheel of fortune;

 (h)  for valuable consideration carries on or plays or offers to carry on or to play, or employs any person to carry on or play in a public place or a place to which the public have access, the game of three-card monte;

 (i)  receives bets of any kind on the outcome of a game of three-card monte; or

 (j)  being the owner of a place, permits any person to play the game of three-card monte therein.

 Definition of three-card monte
 (2)  In this section, three-card monte means the game commonly known as three-card monte and includes any other game that is similar to it, whether or not the game is played with cards and notwithstanding the number of cards or other things that are used for the purpose of playing.

 Marginal note: Exemption for fairs
 (3)  Paragraphs (1)(f) and (g), in so far as they do not relate to a dice game, three-card monte, punch board or coin table, do not apply to the board of an annual fair or exhibition, or to any operator of a concession leased by that board within its own grounds and operated during the fair or exhibition on those grounds.

 Definition of fair or exhibition
 (3.1)  For the purposes of this section, fair or exhibition means an event where agricultural or fishing products are presented or where activities relating to agriculture or fishing take place.

 Marginal note: Offence
 (4)  Every one who buys, takes or receives a lot, ticket or other device mentioned in subsection (1) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Lottery sale void
 (5)  Every sale, loan, gift, barter or exchange of any property, by any lottery, ticket, card or other mode of chance depending on or to be determined by chance or lot, is void, and all property so sold, lent, given, bartered or exchanged is forfeited to Her Majesty.

 Marginal note: Bona fide exception
 (6)  Subsection (5) does not affect any right or title to property acquired by any bona fide purchaser for valuable consideration without notice.

 Marginal note: Foreign lottery included
 (7)  This section applies to the printing or publishing, or causing to be printed or published, of any advertisement, scheme, proposal or plan of any foreign lottery, and the sale or offer for sale of any ticket, chance or share, in any such lottery, or the advertisement for sale of such ticket, chance or share, and the conducting or managing of any such scheme, contrivance or operation for determining the winners in any such lottery.

 Marginal note: Saving
 (8)  This section does not apply to
 (a)  the division by lot or chance of any property by joint tenants or tenants in common, or persons having joint interests in any such property; or

 (b)   [Repealed, 1999, c. 28, s. 156]

 (c)  bonds, debentures, debenture stock or other securities recallable by drawing of lots and redeemable with interest and providing for payment of premiums on redemption or otherwise.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 206
 R.S., 1985, c. 52 (1st Supp.), s. 2
 1999, c. 28, s. 156

 Marginal note: Permitted lotteries
 207   (1)  Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Part relating to gaming and betting, it is lawful
 (a)  for the government of a province, either alone or in conjunction with the government of another province, to conduct and manage a lottery scheme in that province, or in that and the other province, in accordance with any law enacted by the legislature of that province;

 (b)  for a charitable or religious organization, pursuant to a licence issued by the Lieutenant Governor in Council of a province or by such other person or authority in the province as may be specified by the Lieutenant Governor in Council thereof, to conduct and manage a lottery scheme in that province if the proceeds from the lottery scheme are used for a charitable or religious object or purpose;

 (c)  for the board of a fair or of an exhibition, or an operator of a concession leased by that board, to conduct and manage a lottery scheme in a province where the Lieutenant Governor in Council of the province or such other person or authority in the province as may be specified by the Lieutenant Governor in Council thereof has
 (i)  designated that fair or exhibition as a fair or exhibition where a lottery scheme may be conducted and managed, and

 (ii)  issued a licence for the conduct and management of a lottery scheme to that board or operator;

 (d)  for any person, pursuant to a licence issued by the Lieutenant Governor in Council of a province or by such other person or authority in the province as may be specified by the Lieutenant Governor in Council thereof, to conduct and manage a lottery scheme at a public place of amusement in that province if
 (i)  the amount or value of each prize awarded does not exceed five hundred dollars, and

 (ii)  the money or other valuable consideration paid to secure a chance to win a prize does not exceed two dollars;

 (e)  for the government of a province to agree with the government of another province that lots, cards or tickets in relation to a lottery scheme that is by any of paragraphs (a) to (d) authorized to be conducted and managed in that other province may be sold in the province;

 (f)  for any person, pursuant to a licence issued by the Lieutenant Governor in Council of a province or such other person or authority in the province as may be designated by the Lieutenant Governor in Council thereof, to conduct and manage in the province a lottery scheme that is authorized to be conducted and managed in one or more other provinces where the authority by which the lottery scheme was first authorized to be conducted and managed consents thereto;

 (g)  for any person, for the purpose of a lottery scheme that is lawful in a province under any of paragraphs (a) to (f), to do anything in the province, in accordance with the applicable law or licence, that is required for the conduct, management or operation of the lottery scheme or for the person to participate in the scheme; and

 (h)  for any person to make or print anywhere in Canada or to cause to be made or printed anywhere in Canada anything relating to gaming and betting that is to be used in a place where it is or would, if certain conditions provided by law are met, be lawful to use such a thing, or to send, transmit, mail, ship, deliver or allow to be sent, transmitted, mailed, shipped or delivered or to accept for carriage or transport or convey any such thing where the destination thereof is such a place.

 Marginal note: Terms and conditions of licence
 (2)  Subject to this Act, a licence issued by or under the authority of the Lieutenant Governor in Council of a province as described in paragraph (1)(b), (c), (d) or (f) may contain such terms and conditions relating to the conduct, management and operation of or participation in the lottery scheme to which the licence relates as the Lieutenant Governor in Council of that province, the person or authority in the province designated by the Lieutenant Governor in Council thereof or any law enacted by the legislature of that province may prescribe.

 Marginal note: Offence
 (3)  Every one who, for the purposes of a lottery scheme, does anything that is not authorized by or pursuant to a provision of this section
 (a)  in the case of the conduct, management or operation of that lottery scheme,
 (i)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or

 (ii)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction; or

 (b)  in the case of participating in that lottery scheme, is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Definition of lottery scheme
 (4)  In this section, lottery scheme means a game or any proposal, scheme, plan, means, device, contrivance or operation described in any of paragraphs 206(1)(a) to (g), whether or not it involves betting, pool selling or a pool system of betting other than
 (a)  three-card monte, punch board or coin table;

 (b)  bookmaking, pool selling or the making or recording of bets, including bets made through the agency of a pool or pari-mutuel system, on any race or fight, or on a single sport event or athletic contest; or

 (c)  for the purposes of paragraphs (1)(b) to (f), a game or proposal, scheme, plan, means, device, contrivance or operation described in any of paragraphs 206(1)(a) to (g) that is operated on or through a computer, video device or slot machine, within the meaning of subsection 198(3), or a dice game.

 Marginal note: Exception re: pari-mutuel betting
 (5)  For greater certainty, nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing the making or recording of bets on horse-races through the agency of a pari-mutuel system other than in accordance with section 204.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 207
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 31, c. 52 (1st Supp.), s. 3
 1999, c. 5, s. 6

 Marginal note: Exemption — lottery scheme on an international cruise ship
 207.1   (1)  Despite any of the provisions of this Part relating to gaming and betting, it is lawful for the owner or operator of an international cruise ship, or their agent, to conduct, manage or operate and for any person to participate in a lottery scheme during a voyage on an international cruise ship when all of the following conditions are satisfied:
 (a)  all the people participating in the lottery scheme are located on the ship;

 (b)  the lottery scheme is not linked, by any means of communication, with any lottery scheme, betting, pool selling or pool system of betting located off the ship;

 (c)  the lottery scheme is not operated within five nautical miles of a Canadian port at which the ship calls or is scheduled to call; and

 (d)  the ship is registered
 (i)  in Canada and its entire voyage is scheduled to be outside Canada, or

 (ii)  anywhere, including Canada, and its voyage includes some scheduled voyaging within Canada and the voyage
 (A)  is of at least forty-eight hours duration and includes some voyaging in international waters and at least one non-Canadian port of call including the port at which the voyage begins or ends, and

 (B)  is not scheduled to disembark any passengers at a Canadian port who have embarked at another Canadian port, without calling on at least one non-Canadian port between the two Canadian ports.

 Marginal note: Paragraph 207(1)(h) and subsection 207(5) apply
 (2)  For greater certainty, paragraph 207(1)(h) and subsection 207(5) apply for the purposes of this section.

 Marginal note: Offence
 (3)  Every one who, for the purpose of a lottery scheme, does anything that is not authorized by this section
 (a)  in the case of the conduct, management or operation of the lottery scheme,
 (i)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years, or

 (ii)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction; and

 (b)  in the case of participating in the lottery scheme, is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Definitions
 (4)  The definitions in this subsection apply in this section.
 international cruise ship international cruise ship  means a passenger ship that is suitable for continuous ocean voyages of at least forty-eight hours duration, but does not include such a ship that is used or fitted for the primary purpose of transporting cargo or vehicles. ( navire de croisière internationale )
 lottery scheme lottery scheme  means a game or any proposal, scheme, plan, means, device, contrivance or operation described in any of paragraphs 206(1)(a) to (g), whether or not it involves betting, pool selling or a pool system of betting. It does not include
 (a)  three-card monte, punch board or coin table; or

 (b)  bookmaking, pool selling or the making or recording of bets, including bets made through the agency of a pool or pari-mutuel system, on any race or fight, or on a single sporting event or athletic contest. ( loterie )

 1999, c. 5, s. 7

 208   [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 32]
 Marginal note: Cheating at play
 209  Every one who, with intent to defraud any person, cheats while playing a game or in holding the stakes for a game or in betting is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 192

 Bawdy-houses
 Marginal note: Keeping common bawdy-house
 210   (1)  Every one who keeps a common bawdy-house is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Landlord, inmate, etc.
 (2)  Every one who
 (a)  is an inmate of a common bawdy-house,

 (b)  is found, without lawful excuse, in a common bawdy-house, or

 (c)  as owner, landlord, lessor, tenant, occupier, agent or otherwise having charge or control of any place, knowingly permits the place or any part thereof to be let or used for the purposes of a common bawdy-house,

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Notice of conviction to be served on owner
 (3)  Where a person is convicted of an offence under subsection (1), the court shall cause a notice of the conviction to be served on the owner, landlord or lessor of the place in respect of which the person is convicted or his agent, and the notice shall contain a statement to the effect that it is being served pursuant to this section.

 Marginal note: Duty of landlord on notice
 (4)  Where a person on whom a notice is served under subsection (3) fails forthwith to exercise any right he may have to determine the tenancy or right of occupation of the person so convicted, and thereafter any person is convicted of an offence under subsection (1) in respect of the same premises, the person on whom the notice was served shall be deemed to have committed an offence under subsection (1) unless he proves that he has taken all reasonable steps to prevent the recurrence of the offence.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 193

 Marginal note: Transporting person to bawdy-house
 211  Every one who knowingly takes, transports, directs, or offers to take, transport or direct, any other person to a common bawdy-house is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 194

 Procuring
 Marginal note: Procuring
 212   (1)  Every one who
 (a)  procures, attempts to procure or solicits a person to have illicit sexual intercourse with another person, whether in or out of Canada,

 (b)  inveigles or entices a person who is not a prostitute to a common bawdy-house for the purpose of illicit sexual intercourse or prostitution,

 (c)  knowingly conceals a person in a common bawdy-house,

 (d)  procures or attempts to procure a person to become, whether in or out of Canada, a prostitute,

 (e)  procures or attempts to procure a person to leave the usual place of abode of that person in Canada, if that place is not a common bawdy-house, with intent that the person may become an inmate or frequenter of a common bawdy-house, whether in or out of Canada,

 (f)  on the arrival of a person in Canada, directs or causes that person to be directed or takes or causes that person to be taken, to a common bawdy-house,

 (g)  procures a person to enter or leave Canada, for the purpose of prostitution,

 (h)  for the purposes of gain, exercises control, direction or influence over the movements of a person in such manner as to show that he is aiding, abetting or compelling that person to engage in or carry on prostitution with any person or generally,

 (i)  applies or administers to a person or causes that person to take any drug, intoxicating liquor, matter or thing with intent to stupefy or overpower that person in order thereby to enable any person to have illicit sexual intercourse with that person, or

 (j)  lives wholly or in part on the avails of prostitution of another person,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Living on the avails of prostitution of person under eighteen
 (2)  Despite paragraph (1)(j), every person who lives wholly or in part on the avails of prostitution of another person who is under the age of eighteen years is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of two years.

 Marginal note: Aggravated offence in relation to living on the avails of prostitution of a person under the age of eighteen years
 (2.1)  Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(j) and subsection (2), every person who lives wholly or in part on the avails of prostitution of another person under the age of eighteen years, and who
 (a)  for the purposes of profit, aids, abets, counsels or compels the person under that age to engage in or carry on prostitution with any person or generally, and

 (b)  uses, threatens to use or attempts to use violence, intimidation or coercion in relation to the person under that age,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years but not less than five years.

 Marginal note: Presumption
 (3)  Evidence that a person lives with or is habitually in the company of a prostitute or lives in a common bawdy-house is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof that the person lives on the avails of prostitution, for the purposes of paragraph (1)(j) and subsections (2) and (2.1).

 Marginal note: Offence — prostitution of person under eighteen
 (4)  Every person who, in any place, obtains for consideration, or communicates with anyone for the purpose of obtaining for consideration, the sexual services of a person who is under the age of eighteen years is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of six months.

 (5)   [Repealed, 1999, c. 5, s. 8]

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 212
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 9
 1997, c. 16, s. 2
 1999, c. 5, s. 8
 2005, c. 32, s. 10.1

 Offence in Relation to Prostitution
 Marginal note: Offence in relation to prostitution
 213   (1)  Every person who in a public place or in any place open to public view
 (a)  stops or attempts to stop any motor vehicle,

 (b)  impedes the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or ingress to or egress from premises adjacent to that place, or

 (c)  stops or attempts to stop any person or in any manner communicates or attempts to communicate with any person

 for the purpose of engaging in prostitution or of obtaining the sexual services of a prostitute is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Definition of “public place”
 (2)  In this section, public place includes any place to which the public have access as of right or by invitation, express or implied, and any motor vehicle located in a public place or in any place open to public view.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 213
 R.S., 1985, c. 51 (1st Supp.), s. 1

 PART VIII Offences Against the Person and Reputation
 Interpretation
 Marginal note: Definitions
 214  In this Part,
 abandon or expose
 abandonner ou exposer
 abandon or expose includes
 (a)  a wilful omission to take charge of a child by a person who is under a legal duty to do so, and

 (b)  dealing with a child in a manner that is likely to leave that child exposed to risk without protection; ( abandonner ou exposer )

 aircraft
 aéronef
 aircraft does not include a machine designed to derive support in the atmosphere primarily from reactions against the earth’s surface of air expelled from the machine; ( aéronef )
 child child [Repealed, 2002, c. 13, s. 9]
 form of marriage
 formalité de mariage
 form of marriage includes a ceremony of marriage that is recognized as valid
 (a)  by the law of the place where it was celebrated, or

 (b)  by the law of the place where an accused is tried, notwithstanding that it is not recognized as valid by the law of the place where it was celebrated; ( formalité de mariage )

 guardian
 tuteur
 guardian includes a person who has in law or in fact the custody or control of a child; ( tuteur )
 operate
 conduire
 operate
 (a)  means, in respect of a motor vehicle, to drive the vehicle,

 (b)  means, in respect of railway equipment, to participate in the direct control of its motion, whether
 (i)  as a member of the crew of the equipment,

 (ii)  as a person who, by remote control, acts in lieu of such crew, or

 (iii)  as other than a member or person described in subparagraphs (i) and (ii), and

 (c)  includes, in respect of a vessel or an aircraft, to navigate the vessel or aircraft; ( conduire )

 vessel
 bateau
 vessel includes a machine designed to derive support in the atmosphere primarily from reactions against the earth’s surface of air expelled from the machine. ( bateau )
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 214
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 33, c. 32 (4th Supp.), s. 56
 2002, c. 13, s. 9

 Duties Tending to Preservation of Life
 Marginal note: Duty of persons to provide necessaries
 215   (1)  Every one is under a legal duty
 (a)  as a parent, foster parent, guardian or head of a family, to provide necessaries of life for a child under the age of sixteen years;

 (b)  to provide necessaries of life to their spouse or common-law partner; and

 (c)  to provide necessaries of life to a person under his charge if that person
 (i)  is unable, by reason of detention, age, illness, mental disorder or other cause, to withdraw himself from that charge, and

 (ii)  is unable to provide himself with necessaries of life.

 Marginal note: Offence
 (2)  Every one commits an offence who, being under a legal duty within the meaning of subsection (1), fails without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him, to perform that duty, if
 (a)  with respect to a duty imposed by paragraph (1)(a) or (b),
 (i)  the person to whom the duty is owed is in destitute or necessitous circumstances, or

 (ii)  the failure to perform the duty endangers the life of the person to whom the duty is owed, or causes or is likely to cause the health of that person to be endangered permanently; or

 (b)  with respect to a duty imposed by paragraph (1)(c), the failure to perform the duty endangers the life of the person to whom the duty is owed or causes or is likely to cause the health of that person to be injured permanently.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (2)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months.

 Marginal note: Presumptions
 (4)  For the purpose of proceedings under this section,
 (a)   [Repealed, 2000, c. 12, s. 93]

 (b)  evidence that a person has in any way recognized a child as being his child is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that the child is his child;

 (c)  evidence that a person has failed for a period of one month to make provision for the maintenance of any child of theirs under the age of sixteen years is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that the person has failed without lawful excuse to provide necessaries of life for the child; and

 (d)  the fact that a spouse or common-law partner or child is receiving or has received necessaries of life from another person who is not under a legal duty to provide them is not a defence.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 215
 1991, c. 43, s. 9
 2000, c. 12, ss. 93, 95
 2005, c. 32, s. 11

 Marginal note: Duty of persons undertaking acts dangerous to life
 216  Every one who undertakes to administer surgical or medical treatment to another person or to do any other lawful act that may endanger the life of another person is, except in cases of necessity, under a legal duty to have and to use reasonable knowledge, skill and care in so doing.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 198

 Marginal note: Duty of persons undertaking acts
 217  Every one who undertakes to do an act is under a legal duty to do it if an omission to do the act is or may be dangerous to life.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 199

 Marginal note: Duty of persons directing work
 217.1  Every one who undertakes, or has the authority, to direct how another person does work or performs a task is under a legal duty to take reasonable steps to prevent bodily harm to that person, or any other person, arising from that work or task.
 2003, c. 21, s. 3

 Marginal note: Abandoning child
 218  Every one who unlawfully abandons or exposes a child who is under the age of ten years, so that its life is or is likely to be endangered or its health is or is likely to be permanently injured,
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 218
 2005, c. 32, s. 12

 Criminal Negligence
 Marginal note: Criminal negligence
 219   (1)  Every one is criminally negligent who
 (a)  in doing anything, or

 (b)  in omitting to do anything that it is his duty to do,

 shows wanton or reckless disregard for the lives or safety of other persons.

 Definition of duty
 (2)  For the purposes of this section, duty means a duty imposed by law.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 202

 Marginal note: Causing death by criminal negligence
 220  Every person who by criminal negligence causes death to another person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  where a firearm is used in the commission of the offence, to imprisonment for life and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years; and

 (b)  in any other case, to imprisonment for life.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 220
 1995, c. 39, s. 141

 Marginal note: Causing bodily harm by criminal negligence
 221  Every one who by criminal negligence causes bodily harm to another person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 204

 Homicide
 Marginal note: Homicide
 222   (1)  A person commits homicide when, directly or indirectly, by any means, he causes the death of a human being.

 Marginal note: Kinds of homicide
 (2)  Homicide is culpable or not culpable.

 Marginal note: Non culpable homicide
 (3)  Homicide that is not culpable is not an offence.

 Marginal note: Culpable homicide
 (4)  Culpable homicide is murder or manslaughter or infanticide.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (5)  A person commits culpable homicide when he causes the death of a human being,
 (a)  by means of an unlawful act;

 (b)  by criminal negligence;

 (c)  by causing that human being, by threats or fear of violence or by deception, to do anything that causes his death; or

 (d)  by wilfully frightening that human being, in the case of a child or sick person.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (6)  Notwithstanding anything in this section, a person does not commit homicide within the meaning of this Act by reason only that he causes the death of a human being by procuring, by false evidence, the conviction and death of that human being by sentence of the law.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 205

 Marginal note: When child becomes human being
 223   (1)  A child becomes a human being within the meaning of this Act when it has completely proceeded, in a living state, from the body of its mother, whether or not
 (a)  it has breathed;

 (b)  it has an independent circulation; or

 (c)  the navel string is severed.

 Marginal note: Killing child
 (2)  A person commits homicide when he causes injury to a child before or during its birth as a result of which the child dies after becoming a human being.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 206

 Marginal note: Death that might have been prevented
 224  Where a person, by an act or omission, does any thing that results in the death of a human being, he causes the death of that human being notwithstanding that death from that cause might have been prevented by resorting to proper means.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 207

 Marginal note: Death from treatment of injury
 225  Where a person causes to a human being a bodily injury that is of itself of a dangerous nature and from which death results, he causes the death of that human being notwithstanding that the immediate cause of death is proper or improper treatment that is applied in good faith.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 208

 Marginal note: Acceleration of death
 226  Where a person causes to a human being a bodily injury that results in death, he causes the death of that human being notwithstanding that the effect of the bodily injury is only to accelerate his death from a disease or disorder arising from some other cause.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 209

 227   [Repealed, 1999, c. 5, s. 9]
 Marginal note: Killing by influence on the mind
 228  No person commits culpable homicide where he causes the death of a human being
 (a)  by any influence on the mind alone, or

 (b)  by any disorder or disease resulting from influence on the mind alone,

 but this section does not apply where a person causes the death of a child or sick person by wilfully frightening him.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 211

 Murder, Manslaughter and Infanticide
 Marginal note: Murder
 229  Culpable homicide is murder
 (a)  where the person who causes the death of a human being
 (i)  means to cause his death, or

 (ii)  means to cause him bodily harm that he knows is likely to cause his death, and is reckless whether death ensues or not;

 (b)  where a person, meaning to cause death to a human being or meaning to cause him bodily harm that he knows is likely to cause his death, and being reckless whether death ensues or not, by accident or mistake causes death to another human being, notwithstanding that he does not mean to cause death or bodily harm to that human being; or

 (c)  where a person, for an unlawful object, does anything that he knows or ought to know is likely to cause death, and thereby causes death to a human being, notwithstanding that he desires to effect his object without causing death or bodily harm to any human being.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 212

 Marginal note: Murder in commission of offences
 230  Culpable homicide is murder where a person causes the death of a human being while committing or attempting to commit high treason or treason or an offence mentioned in section 52 (sabotage), 75 (piratical acts), 76 (hijacking an aircraft), 144 or subsection 145(1) or sections 146 to 148 (escape or rescue from prison or lawful custody), section 270 (assaulting a peace officer), section 271 (sexual assault), 272 (sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm), 273 (aggravated sexual assault), 279 (kidnapping and forcible confinement), 279.1 (hostage taking), 343 (robbery), 348 (breaking and entering) or 433 or 434 (arson), whether or not the person means to cause death to any human being and whether or not he knows that death is likely to be caused to any human being, if
 (a)  he means to cause bodily harm for the purpose of
 (i)  facilitating the commission of the offence, or

 (ii)  facilitating his flight after committing or attempting to commit the offence,

 and the death ensues from the bodily harm;

 (b)  he administers a stupefying or overpowering thing for a purpose mentioned in paragraph (a), and the death ensues therefrom; or

 (c)  he wilfully stops, by any means, the breath of a human being for a purpose mentioned in paragraph (a), and the death ensues therefrom.

 (d)   [Repealed, 1991, c. 4, s. 1]

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 230
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 40
 1991, c. 4, s. 1

 Marginal note: Classification of murder
 231   (1)  Murder is first degree murder or second degree murder.

 Marginal note: Planned and deliberate murder
 (2)  Murder is first degree murder when it is planned and deliberate.

 Marginal note: Contracted murder
 (3)  Without limiting the generality of subsection (2), murder is planned and deliberate when it is committed pursuant to an arrangement under which money or anything of value passes or is intended to pass from one person to another, or is promised by one person to another, as consideration for that other’s causing or assisting in causing the death of anyone or counselling another person to do any act causing or assisting in causing that death.

 Marginal note: Murder of peace officer, etc.
 (4)  Irrespective of whether a murder is planned and deliberate on the part of any person, murder is first degree murder when the victim is
 (a)  a police officer, police constable, constable, sheriff, deputy sheriff, sheriff’s officer or other person employed for the preservation and maintenance of the public peace, acting in the course of his duties;

 (b)  a warden, deputy warden, instructor, keeper, jailer, guard or other officer or a permanent employee of a prison, acting in the course of his duties; or

 (c)  a person working in a prison with the permission of the prison authorities and acting in the course of his work therein.

 Marginal note: Hijacking, sexual assault or kidnapping
 (5)  Irrespective of whether a murder is planned and deliberate on the part of any person, murder is first degree murder in respect of a person when the death is caused by that person while committing or attempting to commit an offence under one of the following sections:
 (a)  section 76 (hijacking an aircraft);

 (b)  section 271 (sexual assault);

 (c)  section 272 (sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm);

 (d)  section 273 (aggravated sexual assault);

 (e)  section 279 (kidnapping and forcible confinement); or

 (f)  section 279.1 (hostage taking).

 Marginal note: Criminal harassment
 (6)  Irrespective of whether a murder is planned and deliberate on the part of any person, murder is first degree murder when the death is caused by that person while committing or attempting to commit an offence under section 264 and the person committing that offence intended to cause the person murdered to fear for the safety of the person murdered or the safety of anyone known to the person murdered.

 Marginal note: Murder during terrorist activity
 (6.01)  Irrespective of whether a murder is planned and deliberate on the part of a person, murder is first degree murder when the death is caused while committing or attempting to commit an indictable offence under this or any other Act of Parliament where the act or omission constituting the offence also constitutes a terrorist activity.

 Marginal note: Using explosives in association with criminal organization
 (6.1)  Irrespective of whether a murder is planned and deliberate on the part of a person, murder is first degree murder when the death is caused while committing or attempting to commit an offence under section 81 for the benefit of, at the direction of or in association with a criminal organization.

 Marginal note: Intimidation
 (6.2)  Irrespective of whether a murder is planned and deliberate on the part of a person, murder is first degree murder when the death is caused while committing or attempting to commit an offence under section 423.1.

 Marginal note: Second degree murder
 (7)  All murder that is not first degree murder is second degree murder.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 231
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), ss. 7, 35, 40, 185(F), c. 1 (4th Supp.), s. 18(F)
 1997, c. 16, s. 3, c. 23, s. 8
 2001, c. 32, s. 9, c. 41, s. 9

 Marginal note: Murder reduced to manslaughter
 232   (1)  Culpable homicide that otherwise would be murder may be reduced to manslaughter if the person who committed it did so in the heat of passion caused by sudden provocation.

 Marginal note: What is provocation
 (2)  A wrongful act or an insult that is of such a nature as to be sufficient to deprive an ordinary person of the power of self-control is provocation for the purposes of this section if the accused acted on it on the sudden and before there was time for his passion to cool.

 Marginal note: Questions of fact
 (3)  For the purposes of this section, the questions
 (a)  whether a particular wrongful act or insult amounted to provocation, and

 (b)  whether the accused was deprived of the power of self-control by the provocation that he alleges he received,

 are questions of fact, but no one shall be deemed to have given provocation to another by doing anything that he had a legal right to do, or by doing anything that the accused incited him to do in order to provide the accused with an excuse for causing death or bodily harm to any human being.

 Marginal note: Death during illegal arrest
 (4)  Culpable homicide that otherwise would be murder is not necessarily manslaughter by reason only that it was committed by a person who was being arrested illegally, but the fact that the illegality of the arrest was known to the accused may be evidence of provocation for the purpose of this section.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 215

 Marginal note: Infanticide
 233  A female person commits infanticide when by a wilful act or omission she causes the death of her newly-born child, if at the time of the act or omission she is not fully recovered from the effects of giving birth to the child and by reason thereof or of the effect of lactation consequent on the birth of the child her mind is then disturbed.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 216

 Marginal note: Manslaughter
 234  Culpable homicide that is not murder or infanticide is manslaughter.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 217

 Marginal note: Punishment for murder
 235   (1)  Every one who commits first degree murder or second degree murder is guilty of an indictable offence and shall be sentenced to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Minimum punishment
 (2)  For the purposes of Part XXIII, the sentence of imprisonment for life prescribed by this section is a minimum punishment.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 218
 1973-74, c. 38, s. 3
 1974-75-76, c. 105, s. 5

 Marginal note: Manslaughter
 236  Every person who commits manslaughter is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  where a firearm is used in the commission of the offence, to imprisonment for life and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years; and

 (b)  in any other case, to imprisonment for life.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 236
 1995, c. 39, s. 142

 Marginal note: Punishment for infanticide
 237  Every female person who commits infanticide is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 220

 Marginal note: Killing unborn child in act of birth
 238   (1)  Every one who causes the death, in the act of birth, of any child that has not become a human being, in such a manner that, if the child were a human being, he would be guilty of murder, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Saving
 (2)  This section does not apply to a person who, by means that, in good faith, he considers necessary to preserve the life of the mother of a child, causes the death of that child.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 221

 Marginal note: Attempt to commit murder
 239  Every person who attempts by any means to commit murder is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  where a firearm is used in the commission of the offence, to imprisonment for life and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years; and

 (b)  in any other case, to imprisonment for life.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 239
 1995, c. 39, s. 143

 Marginal note: Accessory after fact to murder
 240  Every one who is an accessory after the fact to murder is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 223

 Suicide
 Marginal note: Counselling or aiding suicide
 241  Every one who
 (a)  counsels a person to commit suicide, or

 (b)  aids or abets a person to commit suicide,

 whether suicide ensues or not, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 241
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 7

 Neglect in Child-birth and Concealing Dead Body
 Marginal note: Neglect to obtain assistance in child-birth
 242  A female person who, being pregnant and about to be delivered, with intent that the child shall not live or with intent to conceal the birth of the child, fails to make provision for reasonable assistance in respect of her delivery is, if the child is permanently injured as a result thereof or dies immediately before, during or in a short time after birth, as a result thereof, guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 226

 Marginal note: Concealing body of child
 243  Every one who in any manner disposes of the dead body of a child, with intent to conceal the fact that its mother has been delivered of it, whether the child died before, during or after birth, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 227

 Bodily Harm and Acts and Omissions Causing Danger to the Person
 Marginal note: Causing bodily harm with intent — firearm
 244  Every person who, with intent
 (a)  to wound, maim or disfigure any person,

 (b)  to endanger the life of any person, or

 (c)  to prevent the arrest or detention of any person,

 discharges a firearm at any person, whether or not that person is the person mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) or (c), is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 244
 1995, c. 39, s. 144

 Marginal note: Causing bodily harm with intent — air gun or pistol
 244.1  Every person who, with intent
 (a)  to wound, maim or disfigure any person,

 (b)  to endanger the life of any person, or

 (c)  to prevent the arrest or detention of any person,

 discharges an air or compressed gas gun or pistol at any person, whether or not that person is the person mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) or (c), is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 1995, c. 39, s. 144

 Marginal note: Administering noxious thing
 245  Every one who administers or causes to be administered to any person or causes any person to take poison or any other destructive or noxious thing is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years, if he intends thereby to endanger the life of or to cause bodily harm to that person; or

 (b)  to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, if he intends thereby to aggrieve or annoy that person.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 229

 Marginal note: Overcoming resistance to commission of offence
 246  Every one who, with intent to enable or assist himself or another person to commit an indictable offence,
 (a)  attempts, by any means, to choke, suffocate or strangle another person, or by any means calculated to choke, suffocate or strangle, attempts to render another person insensible, unconscious or incapable of resistance, or

 (b)  administers or causes to be administered to any person, or attempts to administer to any person, or causes or attempts to cause any person to take a stupefying or overpowering drug, matter or thing,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 230
 1972, c. 13, s. 70

 Marginal note: Traps likely to cause bodily harm
 247   (1)  Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, who with intent to cause death or bodily harm to a person, whether ascertained or not,
 (a)  sets or places a trap, device or other thing that is likely to cause death or bodily harm to a person; or

 (b)  being in occupation or possession of a place, knowingly permits such a trap, device or other thing to remain in that place.

 Marginal note: Bodily harm
 (2)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1) and thereby causes bodily harm to any other person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Offence-related place
 (3)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1), in a place kept or used for the purpose of committing another indictable offence, is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Offence-related place — bodily harm
 (4)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1), in a place kept or used for the purpose of committing another indictable offence, and thereby causes bodily harm to a person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding fourteen years.

 Marginal note: Death
 (5)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1) and thereby causes the death of any other person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 247
 2004, c. 12, s. 6

 Marginal note: Interfering with transportation facilities
 248  Every one who, with intent to endanger the safety of any person, places anything on or does anything to any property that is used for or in connection with the transportation of persons or goods by land, water or air that is likely to cause death or bodily harm to persons is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 232

 Motor Vehicles, Vessels and Aircraft
 Marginal note: Dangerous operation of motor vehicles, vessels and aircraft
 249   (1)  Every one commits an offence who operates
 (a)  a motor vehicle in a manner that is dangerous to the public, having regard to all the circumstances, including the nature, condition and use of the place at which the motor vehicle is being operated and the amount of traffic that at the time is or might reasonably be expected to be at that place;

 (b)  a vessel or any water skis, surf-board, water sled or other towed object on or over any of the internal waters of Canada or the territorial sea of Canada, in a manner that is dangerous to the public, having regard to all the circumstances, including the nature and condition of those waters or sea and the use that at the time is or might reasonably be expected to be made of those waters or sea;

 (c)  an aircraft in a manner that is dangerous to the public, having regard to all the circumstances, including the nature and condition of that aircraft or the place or air space in or through which the aircraft is operated; or

 (d)  railway equipment in a manner that is dangerous to the public, having regard to all the circumstances, including the nature and condition of the equipment or the place in or through which the equipment is operated.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Dangerous operation causing bodily harm
 (3)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1) and thereby causes bodily harm to any other person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Dangerous operation causing death
 (4)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1) and thereby causes the death of any other person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 249
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 36, c. 32 (4th Supp.), s. 57
 1994, c. 44, s. 11

 Marginal note: Flight
 249.1   (1)  Every one commits an offence who, operating a motor vehicle while being pursued by a peace officer operating a motor vehicle, fails, without reasonable excuse and in order to evade the peace officer, to stop the vehicle as soon as is reasonable in the circumstances.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Flight causing bodily harm or death
 (3)  Every one commits an offence who causes bodily harm to or the death of another person by operating a motor vehicle in a manner described in paragraph 249(1)(a), if the person operating the motor vehicle was being pursued by a peace officer operating a motor vehicle and failed, without reasonable excuse and in order to evade the police officer, to stop the vehicle as soon as is reasonable in the circumstances.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (4)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (3)
 (a)  if bodily harm was caused, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 14 years; and

 (b)  if death was caused, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 2000, c. 2, s. 1

 Marginal note: Causing death by criminal negligence (street racing)
 249.2  Everyone who by criminal negligence causes death to another person while street racing is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.
 2006, c. 14, s. 2

 Marginal note: Causing bodily harm by criminal negligence (street racing)
 249.3  Everyone who by criminal negligence causes bodily harm to another person while street racing is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 2006, c. 14, s. 2

 Marginal note: Dangerous operation of motor vehicle while street racing
 249.4   (1)  Everyone commits an offence who, while street racing, operates a motor vehicle in a manner described in paragraph 249(1)(a).

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Everyone who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Dangerous operation causing bodily harm
 (3)  Everyone who commits an offence under subsection (1) and thereby causes bodily harm to another person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 Marginal note: Dangerous operation causing death
 (4)  Everyone who commits an offence under subsection (1) and thereby causes the death of another person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 2006, c. 14, s. 2

 Marginal note: Failure to keep watch on person towed
 250   (1)  Every one who operates a vessel while towing a person on any water skis, surf-board, water sled or other object, when there is not on board such vessel another responsible person keeping watch on the person being towed, is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Towing of person after dark
 (2)  Every one who operates a vessel while towing a person on any water skis, surf-board, water sled or other object during the period from one hour after sunset to sunrise is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 250
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 36

 Marginal note: Unseaworthy vessel and unsafe aircraft
 251   (1)  Every one who knowingly
 (a)  sends or being the master takes a vessel that is registered or licensed, or for which an identification number has been issued, pursuant to any Act of Parliament and that is unseaworthy
 (i)  on a voyage from a place in Canada to any other place in or out of Canada, or

 (ii)  on a voyage from a place on the inland waters of the United States to a place in Canada,

 (b)  sends an aircraft on a flight or operates an aircraft that is not fit and safe for flight, or

 (c)  sends for operation or operates railway equipment that is not fit and safe for operation

 and thereby endangers the life of any person, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Defences
 (2)  An accused shall not be convicted of an offence under this section where the accused establishes that,
 (a)  in the case of an offence under paragraph (1)(a),
 (i)  the accused used all reasonable means to ensure that the vessel was seaworthy, or

 (ii)  to send or take the vessel while it was unseaworthy was, under the circumstances, reasonable and justifiable;

 (b)  in the case of an offence under paragraph (1)(b),
 (i)  the accused used all reasonable means to ensure that the aircraft was fit and safe for flight, or

 (ii)  to send or operate the aircraft while it was not fit and safe for flight was, under the circumstances, reasonable and justifiable; and

 (c)  in the case of an offence under paragraph (1)(c),
 (i)  the accused used all reasonable means to ensure that the railway equipment was fit and safe for operation, or

 (ii)  to send the railway equipment for operation or to operate it while it was not fit and safe for operation was, under the circumstances, reasonable and justifiable.

 Marginal note: Consent of Attorney General
 (3)  No proceedings shall be instituted under this section in respect of a vessel or aircraft, or in respect of railway equipment sent for operation or operated on a line of railway that is within the legislative authority of Parliament, without the consent in writing of the Attorney General of Canada.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 251
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 36, c. 32 (4th Supp.), s. 58

 Marginal note: Failure to stop at scene of accident
 252   (1)  Every person commits an offence who has the care, charge or control of a vehicle, vessel or aircraft that is involved in an accident with
 (a)  another person,

 (b)  a vehicle, vessel or aircraft, or

 (c)  in the case of a vehicle, cattle in the charge of another person,

 and with intent to escape civil or criminal liability fails to stop the vehicle, vessel or, if possible, the aircraft, give his or her name and address and, where any person has been injured or appears to require assistance, offer assistance.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (1.1)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) in a case not referred to in subsection (1.2) or (1.3) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Offence involving bodily harm
 (1.2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) knowing that bodily harm has been caused to another person involved in the accident is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Offence involving bodily harm or death
 (1.3)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life if
 (a)  the person knows that another person involved in the accident is dead; or

 (b)  the person knows that bodily harm has been caused to another person involved in the accident and is reckless as to whether the death of the other person results from that bodily harm, and the death of that other person so results.

 Marginal note: Evidence
 (2)  In proceedings under subsection (1), evidence that an accused failed to stop his vehicle, vessel or, where possible, his aircraft, as the case may be, offer assistance where any person has been injured or appears to require assistance and give his name and address is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof of an intent to escape civil or criminal liability.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 252
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 36
 1994, c. 44, s. 12
 1999, c. 32, s. 1(Preamble)

 Marginal note: Operation while impaired
 253  Every one commits an offence who operates a motor vehicle or vessel or operates or assists in the operation of an aircraft or of railway equipment or has the care or control of a motor vehicle, vessel, aircraft or railway equipment, whether it is in motion or not,
 (a)  while the person’s ability to operate the vehicle, vessel, aircraft or railway equipment is impaired by alcohol or a drug; or

 (b)  having consumed alcohol in such a quantity that the concentration in the person’s blood exceeds eighty milligrams of alcohol in one hundred millilitres of blood.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 253
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 36, c. 32 (4th Supp.), s. 59

 Marginal note: Definitions
 254   (1)  In this section and sections 255 to 258,
 analyst
 analyste
 analyst means a person designated by the Attorney General as an analyst for the purposes of section 258; ( analyste )
 approved container
 contenant approuvé
 approved container means
 (a)  in respect of breath samples, a container of a kind that is designed to receive a sample of the breath of a person for analysis and is approved as suitable for the purposes of section 258 by order of the Attorney General of Canada, and

 (b)  in respect of blood samples, a container of a kind that is designed to receive a sample of the blood of a person for analysis and is approved as suitable for the purposes of section 258 by order of the Attorney General of Canada; ( contenant approuvé )

 approved instrument
 alcootest approuvé
 approved instrument means an instrument of a kind that is designed to receive and make an analysis of a sample of the breath of a person in order to measure the concentration of alcohol in the blood of that person and is approved as suitable for the purposes of section 258 by order of the Attorney General of Canada; ( alcootest approuvé )
 approved screening device
 appareil de détection approuvé
 approved screening device means a device of a kind that is designed to ascertain the presence of alcohol in the blood of a person and that is approved for the purposes of this section by order of the Attorney General of Canada; ( appareil de détection approuvé )
 qualified medical practitioner
 médecin qualifié
 qualified medical practitioner means a person duly qualified by provincial law to practise medicine; ( médecin qualifié )
 qualified technician
 technicien qualifié
 qualified technician means,
 (a)  in respect of breath samples, a person designated by the Attorney General as being qualified to operate an approved instrument, and

 (b)  in respect of blood samples, any person or person of a class of persons designated by the Attorney General as being qualified to take samples of blood for the purposes of this section and sections 256 and 258. ( technicien qualifié )

 Marginal note: Testing for presence of alcohol in the blood
 (2)  Where a peace officer reasonably suspects that a person who is operating a motor vehicle or vessel or operating or assisting in the operation of an aircraft or of railway equipment or who has the care or control of a motor vehicle, vessel or aircraft or of railway equipment, whether it is in motion or not, has alcohol in the person’s body, the peace officer may, by demand made to that person, require the person to provide forthwith such a sample of breath as in the opinion of the peace officer is necessary to enable a proper analysis of the breath to be made by means of an approved screening device and, where necessary, to accompany the peace officer for the purpose of enabling such a sample of breath to be taken.

 Marginal note: Samples of breath or blood where reasonable belief of commission of offence
 (3)  Where a peace officer believes on reasonable and probable grounds that a person is committing, or at any time within the preceding three hours has committed, as a result of the consumption of alcohol, an offence under section 253, the peace officer may, by demand made to that person forthwith or as soon as practicable, require that person to provide then or as soon thereafter as is practicable
 (a)  such samples of the person’s breath as in the opinion of a qualified technician, or

 (b)  where the peace officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that, by reason of any physical condition of the person,
 (i)  the person may be incapable of providing a sample of his breath, or

 (ii)  it would be impracticable to obtain a sample of the person’s breath,

 such samples of the person’s blood, under the conditions referred to in subsection (4), as in the opinion of the qualified medical practitioner or qualified technician taking the samples

 are necessary to enable proper analysis to be made in order to determine the concentration, if any, of alcohol in the person’s blood, and to accompany the peace officer for the purpose of enabling such samples to be taken.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (4)  Samples of blood may only be taken from a person pursuant to a demand made by a peace officer under subsection (3) if the samples are taken by or under the direction of a qualified medical practitioner and the qualified medical practitioner is satisfied that the taking of those samples would not endanger the life or health of the person.

 Marginal note: Failure or refusal to provide sample
 (5)  Every one commits an offence who, without reasonable excuse, fails or refuses to comply with a demand made to him by a peace officer under this section.

 Marginal note: Only one conviction for failure to comply with demand
 (6)  A person who is convicted of an offence committed under subsection (5) for a failure or refusal to comply with a demand made under subsection (2) or paragraph (3)(a) or (b) in respect of any transaction may not be convicted of another offence committed under subsection (5) in respect of the same transaction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 254
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 36, c. 1 (4th Supp.), ss. 14, 18(F), c. 32 (4th Supp.), s. 60
 1999, c. 32, s. 2(Preamble)

 Marginal note: Punishment
 255   (1)  Every one who commits an offence under section 253 or 254 is guilty of an indictable offence or an offence punishable on summary conviction and is liable,
 (a)  whether the offence is prosecuted by indictment or punishable on summary conviction, to the following minimum punishment, namely,
 (i)  for a first offence, to a fine of not less than six hundred dollars,

 (ii)  for a second offence, to imprisonment for not less than fourteen days, and

 (iii)  for each subsequent offence, to imprisonment for not less than ninety days;

 (b)  where the offence is prosecuted by indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; and

 (c)  where the offence is punishable on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months.

 Marginal note: Impaired driving causing bodily harm
 (2)  Every one who commits an offence under paragraph 253(a) and thereby causes bodily harm to any other person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Impaired driving causing death
 (3)  Every one who commits an offence under paragraph 253(a) and thereby causes the death of any other person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Previous convictions
 (4)  Where a person is convicted of an offence committed under paragraph 253(a) or (b) or subsection 254(5), that person shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be convicted for a second or subsequent offence, as the case may be, if the person has previously been convicted of
 (a)  an offence committed under any of those provisions;

 (b)  an offence under subsection (2) or (3); or

 (c)  an offence under section 250, 251, 252, 253, 259 or 260 or subsection 258(4) of this Act as this Act read immediately before the coming into force of this subsection.

 Marginal note: Conditional discharge
 Footnote * (5)  Notwithstanding subsection 730(1), a court may, instead of convicting a person of an offence committed under section 253, after hearing medical or other evidence, if it considers that the person is in need of curative treatment in relation to his consumption of alcohol or drugs and that it would not be contrary to the public interest, by order direct that the person be discharged under section 730 on the conditions prescribed in a probation order, including a condition respecting the person’s attendance for curative treatment in relation to that consumption of alcohol or drugs.
 Return to footnote * [Note: In force in the provinces of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Manitoba, Prince Edward Island, Saskatchewan and Alberta and in the Yukon Territory, the Northwest Territories and the Nunavut Territory, see SI/85-211 and SI/88-24.]

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 255
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 36
 R.S., 1985, c. 1 (4th Supp.), s. 18(F)
 1995, c. 22, s. 18
 1999, c. 32, s. 3(Preamble)
 2000, c. 25, s. 2

 Marginal note: Aggravating circumstances for sentencing purposes
 255.1  Without limiting the generality of section 718.2, where a court imposes a sentence for an offence committed under this Act by means of a motor vehicle, vessel or aircraft or of railway equipment, evidence that the concentration of alcohol in the blood of the offender at the time when the offence was committed exceeded one hundred and sixty milligrams of alcohol in one hundred millilitres of blood shall be deemed to be aggravating circumstances relating to the offence that the court shall consider under paragraph 718.2(a).
 1999, c. 32, s. 4(Preamble)

 Marginal note: Warrants to obtain blood samples
 256   (1)  Subject to subsection (2), if a justice is satisfied, on an information on oath in Form 1 or on an information on oath submitted to the justice under section 487.1 by telephone or other means of telecommunication, that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
 (a)  a person has, within the preceding four hours, committed, as a result of the consumption of alcohol or a drug, an offence under section 253 and the person was involved in an accident resulting in the death of another person or in bodily harm to himself or herself or to any other person, and

 (b)  a qualified medical practitioner is of the opinion that
 (i)  by reason of any physical or mental condition of the person that resulted from the consumption of alcohol or a drug, the accident or any other occurrence related to or resulting from the accident, the person is unable to consent to the taking of samples of his or her blood, and

 (ii)  the taking of samples of blood from the person would not endanger the life or health of the person,

 the justice may issue a warrant authorizing a peace officer to require a qualified medical practitioner to take, or to cause to be taken by a qualified technician under the direction of the qualified medical practitioner, the samples of the blood of the person that in the opinion of the person taking the samples are necessary to enable a proper analysis to be made in order to determine the concentration, if any, of alcohol or drugs in the person’s blood.

 Marginal note: Form
 (2)  A warrant issued pursuant to subsection (1) may be in Form 5 or 5.1 varied to suit the case.

 Marginal note: Information on oath
 (3)  Notwithstanding paragraphs 487.1(4)(b) and (c), an information on oath submitted by telephone or other means of telecommunication for the purposes of this section shall include, instead of the statements referred to in those paragraphs, a statement setting out the offence alleged to have been committed and identifying the person from whom blood samples are to be taken.

 Marginal note: Duration of warrant
 (4)  Samples of blood may be taken from a person pursuant to a warrant issued pursuant to subsection (1) only during such time as a qualified medical practitioner is satisfied that the conditions referred to in subparagraphs (1)(b)(i) and (ii) continue to exist in respect of that person.

 Marginal note: Facsimile to person
 (5)  Where a warrant issued pursuant to subsection (1) is executed, the peace officer shall, as soon as practicable thereafter, give a copy or, in the case of a warrant issued by telephone or other means of telecommunication, a facsimile of the warrant to the person from whom the blood samples were taken.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 256
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 36
 1992, c. 1, s. 58
 1994, c. 44, s. 13
 2000, c. 25, s. 3

 Marginal note: No offence committed
 257   (1)  No qualified medical practitioner or qualified technician is guilty of an offence only by reason of his refusal to take a sample of blood from a person for the purposes of section 254 or 256 and no qualified medical practitioner is guilty of an offence only by reason of his refusal to cause to be taken by a qualified technician under his direction a sample of blood from a person for those purposes.

 Marginal note: No criminal or civil liability
 (2)  No qualified medical practitioner by whom or under whose direction a sample of blood is taken from a person pursuant to a demand made under subsection 254(3) or a warrant issued under section 256 and no qualified technician acting under the direction of a qualified medical practitioner incurs any criminal or civil liability for anything necessarily done with reasonable care and skill in the taking of such a sample of blood.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 257
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 36

 Marginal note: Proceedings under section 255
 258   (1)  In any proceedings under subsection 255(1) in respect of an offence committed under section 253 or in any proceedings under subsection 255(2) or (3),
 (a)  where it is proved that the accused occupied the seat or position ordinarily occupied by a person who operates a motor vehicle, vessel or aircraft or any railway equipment or who assists in the operation of an aircraft or of railway equipment, the accused shall be deemed to have had the care or control of the vehicle, vessel, aircraft or railway equipment, as the case may be, unless the accused establishes that the accused did not occupy that seat or position for the purpose of setting the vehicle, vessel, aircraft or railway equipment in motion or assisting in the operation of the aircraft or railway equipment, as the case may be;

 (b)  the result of an analysis of a sample of the breath or blood of the accused (other than a sample taken pursuant to a demand made under subsection 254(3)) or of the urine or other bodily substance of the accused may be admitted in evidence notwithstanding that, before the accused gave the sample, he was not warned that he need not give the sample or that the result of the analysis of the sample might be used in evidence;

 (c)  where samples of the breath of the accused have been taken pursuant to a demand made under subsection 254(3), if
 (i)  [Not in force]

 (ii)  each sample was taken as soon as practicable after the time when the offence was alleged to have been committed and, in the case of the first sample, not later than two hours after that time, with an interval of at least fifteen minutes between the times when the samples were taken,

 (iii)  each sample was received from the accused directly into an approved container or into an approved instrument operated by a qualified technician, and

 (iv)  an analysis of each sample was made by means of an approved instrument operated by a qualified technician,

 evidence of the results of the analyses so made is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof that the concentration of alcohol in the blood of the accused at the time when the offence was alleged to have been committed was, where the results of the analyses are the same, the concentration determined by the analyses and, where the results of the analyses are different, the lowest of the concentrations determined by the analyses;

 (d)  where a sample of the blood of the accused has been taken pursuant to a demand made under subsection 254(3) or otherwise with the consent of the accused or pursuant to a warrant issued under section 256, if
 (i)  at the time the sample was taken, the person taking the sample took an additional sample of the blood of the accused and one of the samples was retained, to permit an analysis thereof to be made by or on behalf of the accused and, in the case where the accused makes a request within six months from the taking of the samples, one of the samples was ordered to be released pursuant to subsection (4),

 (ii)  both samples referred to in subparagraph (i) were taken as soon as practicable after the time when the offence was alleged to have been committed and in any event not later than two hours after that time,

 (iii)  both samples referred to in subparagraph (i) were taken by a qualified medical practitioner or a qualified technician under the direction of a qualified medical practitioner,

 (iv)  both samples referred to in subparagraph (i) were received from the accused directly into, or placed directly into, approved containers that were subsequently sealed, and

 (v)  an analysis was made by an analyst of at least one of the samples that was contained in a sealed approved container,

 evidence of the result of the analysis is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof that the concentration of alcohol in the blood of the accused at the time when the offence was alleged to have been committed was the concentration determined by the analysis or, where more than one sample was analyzed and the results of the analyses are the same, the concentration determined by the analyses and, where the results of the analyses are different, the lowest of the concentrations determined by the analyses;

 (d.1)  where samples of the breath of the accused or a sample of the blood of the accused have been taken as described in paragraph (c) or (d) under the conditions described therein and the results of the analyses show a concentration of alcohol in blood exceeding eighty milligrams of alcohol in one hundred millilitres of blood, evidence of the result of the analyses is, in the absence of evidence tending to show that the concentration of alcohol in the blood of the accused at the time when the offence was alleged to have been committed did not exceed eighty milligrams of alcohol in one hundred millilitres of blood, proof that the concentration of alcohol in the blood of the accused at the time when the offence was alleged to have been committed exceeded eighty milligrams of alcohol in one hundred millilitres of blood;

 (e)  a certificate of an analyst stating that the analyst has made an analysis of a sample of the blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance of the accused and stating the result of that analysis is evidence of the facts alleged in the certificate without proof of the signature or the official character of the person appearing to have signed the certificate;

 (f)  a certificate of an analyst stating that the analyst has made an analysis of a sample of an alcohol standard that is identified in the certificate and intended for use with an approved instrument and that the sample of the standard analyzed by the analyst was found to be suitable for use with an approved instrument, is evidence that the alcohol standard so identified is suitable for use with an approved instrument without proof of the signature or the official character of the person appearing to have signed the certificate;

 (g)  where samples of the breath of the accused have been taken pursuant to a demand made under subsection 254(3), a certificate of a qualified technician stating
 (i)  that the analysis of each of the samples has been made by means of an approved instrument operated by the technician and ascertained by the technician to be in proper working order by means of an alcohol standard, identified in the certificate, that is suitable for use with an approved instrument,

 (ii)  the results of the analyses so made, and

 (iii)  if the samples were taken by the technician,
 (A)  [Not in force]

 (B)  the time when and place where each sample and any specimen described in clause (A) was taken, and

 (C)  that each sample was received from the accused directly into an approved container or into an approved instrument operated by the technician,

 is evidence of the facts alleged in the certificate without proof of the signature or the official character of the person appearing to have signed the certificate;

 (h)  where a sample of the blood of the accused has been taken pursuant to a demand made under subsection 254(3) or otherwise with the consent of the accused or pursuant to a warrant issued under section 256,
 (i)  a certificate of a qualified medical practitioner stating that
 (A)  the medical practitioner took the sample and that before the sample was taken he was of the opinion that the taking of blood samples from the accused would not endanger the life or health of the accused and, in the case of a demand made pursuant to a warrant issued pursuant to section 256, that by reason of any physical or mental condition of the accused that resulted from the consumption of alcohol, the accident or any other occurrence related to or resulting from the accident, the accused was unable to consent to the taking of his blood,

 (B)  at the time the sample was taken, an additional sample of the blood of the accused was taken to permit analysis of one of the samples to be made by or on behalf of the accused,

 (C)  the time when and place where both samples referred to in clause (B) were taken, and

 (D)  both samples referred to in clause (B) were received from the accused directly into, or placed directly into, approved containers that were subsequently sealed and that are identified in the certificate,

 (ii)  a certificate of a qualified medical practitioner stating that the medical practitioner caused the sample to be taken by a qualified technician under his direction and that before the sample was taken the qualified medical practitioner was of the opinion referred to in clause (i)(A), or

 (iii)  a certificate of a qualified technician stating that the technician took the sample and the facts referred to in clauses (i)(B) to (D)

 is evidence of the facts alleged in the certificate without proof of the signature or official character of the person appearing to have signed the certificate; and

 (i)  a certificate of an analyst stating that the analyst has made an analysis of a sample of the blood of the accused that was contained in a sealed approved container identified in the certificate, the date on which and place where the sample was analyzed and the result of that analysis is evidence of the facts alleged in the certificate without proof of the signature or official character of the person appearing to have signed it.

 Marginal note: No obligation to give sample except as required under section 254
 (2)  No person is required to give a sample of urine or other bodily substance for analysis for the purposes of this section except breath or blood as required under section 254, and evidence that a person failed or refused to give such a sample or that such a sample was not taken is not admissible nor shall such a failure or refusal or the fact that a sample was not taken be the subject of comment by any person in the proceedings.

 Marginal note: Evidence of failure to comply with demand
 (3)  In any proceedings under subsection 255(1) in respect of an offence committed under paragraph 253(a) or in any proceedings under subsection 255(2) or (3), evidence that the accused, without reasonable excuse, failed or refused to comply with a demand made to him by a peace officer under section 254 is admissible and the court may draw an inference therefrom adverse to the accused.

 Marginal note: Release of specimen for testing
 (4)  A judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a court of criminal jurisdiction shall, on the summary application of the accused made within six months from the day on which samples of the blood of the accused were taken, order the release of one of the samples for the purpose of an examination or analysis thereof, subject to such terms as appear to be necessary or desirable to ensure the safeguarding of the sample and its preservation for use in any proceedings in respect of which it was retained.

 Marginal note: Testing blood for presence of drugs
 (5)  Where a sample of blood of an accused has been taken pursuant to a demand made under subsection 254(3) or otherwise with the consent of the accused or pursuant to a warrant issued under section 256, the sample may be tested for the presence of drugs in the blood of the accused.

 Marginal note: Attendance and right to cross-examine
 (6)  A party against whom a certificate described in paragraph (1)(e), (f), (g), (h) or (i) is produced may, with leave of the court, require the attendance of the qualified medical practitioner, analyst or qualified technician, as the case may be, for the purposes of cross-examination.

 Marginal note: Notice of intention to produce certificate
 (7)  No certificate shall be received in evidence pursuant to paragraph (1)(e), (f), (g), (h) or (i) unless the party intending to produce it has, before the trial, given to the other party reasonable notice of his intention and a copy of the certificate.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 258
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 36, c. 32 (4th Supp.), s. 61
 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F)
 1994, c. 44, s. 14(E)
 1997, c. 18, s. 10

 Marginal note: Mandatory order of prohibition
 259   (1)  When an offender is convicted of an offence committed under section 253 or 254 or discharged under section 730 of an offence committed under section 253 and, at the time the offence was committed or, in the case of an offence committed under section 254, within the three hours preceding that time, was operating or had the care or control of a motor vehicle, vessel or aircraft or of railway equipment or was assisting in the operation of an aircraft or of railway equipment, the court that sentences the offender shall, in addition to any other punishment that may be imposed for that offence, make an order prohibiting the offender from operating a motor vehicle on any street, road, highway or other public place, or from operating a vessel or an aircraft or railway equipment, as the case may be,
 (a)  for a first offence, during a period of not more than three years plus any period to which the offender is sentenced to imprisonment, and not less than one year;

 (b)  for a second offence, during a period of not more than five years plus any period to which the offender is sentenced to imprisonment, and not less than two years; and

 (c)  for each subsequent offence, during a period of not less than three years plus any period to which the offender is sentenced to imprisonment.

 Marginal note: Alcohol ignition interlock device program
 (1.1)  In making the order, the court may authorize the offender to operate a motor vehicle equipped with an alcohol ignition interlock device during the prohibition period if the offender registers in an alcohol ignition interlock device program established under the law of the province in which the offender resides.

 Marginal note: Minimum absolute prohibition period
 (1.2)  The authorization has no effect until the expiry of a period fixed by the court
 (a)  of at least 3 months, for a first offence;

 (b)  of at least 6 months, for a second offence; and

 (c)  of at least 12 months, for each subsequent offence.

 Marginal note: Change of province of residence
 (1.3)  The authorization applies to an offender who becomes resident in another province and registers in a program referred to in subsection (1.1) in that province.

 Marginal note: Authorization suspended
 (1.4)  The authorization has no effect during any period that the offender is not registered in a program referred to in subsection (1.1).

 Marginal note: Discretionary order of prohibition
 (2)  Where an offender is convicted or discharged under section 730 of an offence under section 220, 221, 236, 249, 249.1, 250, 251 or 252, subsection 255(2) or (3) or this section committed by means of a motor vehicle, vessel or aircraft or of railway equipment, the court that sentences the offender may, in addition to any other punishment that may be imposed for that offence, make an order prohibiting the offender from operating a motor vehicle on any street, road, highway or other public place, or from operating a vessel, an aircraft or railway equipment, as the case may be
 (a)  during any period that the court considers proper, if the offender is liable to imprisonment for life in respect of that offence;

 (b)  during any period not exceeding ten years plus any period to which the offender is sentenced to imprisonment, if the offender is liable to imprisonment for more than five years but less than life in respect of that offence; and

 (c)  during any period not exceeding three years plus any period to which the offender is sentenced to imprisonment, in any other case.

 Marginal note: Saving
 (3)  No order made under subsection (1) or (2) shall operate to prevent any person from acting as master, mate or engineer of a vessel that is required to carry officers holding certificates as master, mate or engineer.

 Marginal note: Mandatory order of prohibition — street racing
 (3.1)  When an offender is convicted or discharged under section 730 of an offence committed under subsection 249.4(1), the court that sentences the offender shall, in addition to any other punishment that may be imposed for that offence, make an order prohibiting the offender from operating a motor vehicle on any street, road, highway or other public place
 (a)  for a first offence, during a period of not more than three years plus any period to which the offender is sentenced to imprisonment, and not less than one year;

 (b)  for a second offence, during a period of not more than five years plus any period to which the offender is sentenced to imprisonment, and not less than two years; and

 (c)  for each subsequent offence, during a period of not less than three years plus any period to which the offender is sentenced to imprisonment.

 Marginal note: Mandatory order of prohibition — bodily harm
 (3.2)  When an offender is convicted or discharged under section 730 of an offence committed under section 249.3 or subsection 249.4(3), the court that sentences the offender shall, in addition to any other punishment that may be imposed for that offence, make an order prohibiting the offender from operating a motor vehicle on any street, road, highway or other public place
 (a)  for a first offence, during a period of not more than ten years plus any period to which the offender is sentenced to imprisonment, and not less than one year;

 (b)  for a second offence, during a period of not more than ten years plus any period to which the offender is sentenced to imprisonment, and not less than two years; and

 (c)  for each subsequent offence, during a period of not less than three years plus any period to which the offender is sentenced to imprisonment.

 Marginal note: Mandatory order of prohibition — death
 (3.3)  When an offender is convicted or discharged under section 730 of a first offence committed under section 249.2 or subsection 249.4(4), the court that sentences the offender shall, in addition to any other punishment that may be imposed for that offence, make an order prohibiting the offender from operating a motor vehicle on any street, road, highway or other public place
 (a)  for an offence under section 249.2, during a period of not less than one year plus any period to which the offender is sentenced to imprisonment; and

 (b)  for an offence under subsection 249.4(4), during a period of not more than ten years plus any period to which the offender is sentenced to imprisonment, and not less than one year.

 Marginal note: Mandatory life prohibition
 (3.4)  When an offender is convicted or discharged under section 730 of an offence committed under section 249.2 or 249.3 or subsection 249.4(3) or (4), the offender has previously been convicted or discharged under section 730 of one of those offences and at least one of the convictions or discharges is under section 249.2 or subsection 249.4(4), the court that sentences the offender shall make an order prohibiting the offender from operating a motor vehicle on any street, road, highway or other public place for life.

 Marginal note: Operation while disqualified
 (4)  Every one who operates a motor vehicle, vessel or aircraft or any railway equipment in Canada while disqualified from doing so
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Definition of disqualification
 (5)  For the purposes of this section, disqualification means
 (a)  a prohibition from operating a motor vehicle, vessel or aircraft or any railway equipment ordered pursuant to any of subsections (1), (2) and (3.1) to (3.4); or

 (b)  a disqualification or any other form of legal restriction of the right or privilege to operate a motor vehicle, vessel or aircraft imposed
 (i)  in the case of a motor vehicle, under the law of a province, or

 (ii)  in the case of a vessel or an aircraft, under an Act of Parliament,

 in respect of a conviction or discharge under section 730 of any offence referred to in any of subsections (1), (2) and (3.1) to (3.4).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 259
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 36, c. 1 (4th Supp.), s. 18(F), c. 32 (4th Supp.), s. 62
 1995, c. 22, ss. 10, 18
 1997, c. 18, s. 11
 1999, c. 32, s. 5(Preamble)
 2000, c. 2, s. 2
 2001, c. 37, s. 1
 2006, c. 14, s. 3

 Marginal note: Proceedings on making of prohibition order
 260   (1)  If a court makes a prohibition order under section 259 in relation to an offender, it shall cause
 (a)  the order to be read by or to the offender;

 (b)  a copy of the order to be given to the offender; and

 (c)  the offender to be informed of subsection 259(4).

 Marginal note: Endorsement by offender
 (2)  After subsection (1) has been complied with in relation to an offender who is bound by an order referred to in that subsection, the offender shall endorse the order, acknowledging receipt of a copy thereof and that the order has been explained to him.

 Marginal note: Validity of order not affected
 (3)  The failure of an offender to endorse an order pursuant to subsection (2) does not affect the validity of the order.

 Marginal note: Onus
 (4)  In the absence of evidence to the contrary, where it is proved that a disqualification referred to in paragraph 259(5)(b) has been imposed on a person and that notice of the disqualification has been mailed by registered or certified mail to that person, that person shall, after five days following the mailing of the notice, be deemed to have received the notice and to have knowledge of the disqualification, of the date of its commencement and of its duration.

 Marginal note: Certificate admissible in evidence
 (5)  In proceedings under section 259, a certificate setting out with reasonable particularity that a person is disqualified from
 (a)  driving a motor vehicle in a province, purporting to be signed by the registrar of motor vehicles for that province, or

 (b)  operating a vessel or aircraft, purporting to be signed by the Minister of Transport or any person authorized by the Minister of Transport for that purpose

 is evidence of the facts alleged therein without proof of the signature or official character of the person by whom it purports to be signed.

 Marginal note: Notice to accused
 (6)  Subsection (5) does not apply in any proceedings unless at least seven days notice in writing is given to the accused that it is intended to tender the certificate in evidence.

 Definition of registrar of motor vehicles
 (7)  In subsection (5), registrar of motor vehicles includes the deputy of that registrar and any other person or body, by whatever name or title designated, that from time to time performs the duties of superintending the registration of motor vehicles in the province.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 260
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 36, c. 1 (4th Supp.), s. 18(F)
 2006, c. 14, s. 4

 Marginal note: Stay of order pending appeal
 261   (1)  If an appeal is taken against a conviction or discharge under section 730 for an offence committed under any of sections 220, 221, 236, 249 to 255 and 259, a judge of the court being appealed to may direct that any prohibition order under section 259 arising out of the conviction or discharge shall, on any conditions that the judge or court may impose, be stayed pending the final disposition of the appeal or until otherwise ordered by that court.

 Marginal note: Effect of conditions
 (2)  If conditions are imposed under a direction made under subsection (1) that the prohibition order be stayed, the direction shall not operate to decrease the period of prohibition provided in the order.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 261
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 36, c. 1 (4th Supp.), s. 18(F)
 1994, c. 44, ss. 15, 103
 1995, c. 22, s. 10
 1997, c. 18, ss. 12, 141
 2006, c. 14, s. 5

 Marginal note: Impeding attempt to save life
 262  Every one who
 (a)  prevents or impedes or attempts to prevent or impede any person who is attempting to save his own life, or

 (b)  without reasonable cause prevents or impedes or attempts to prevent or impede any person who is attempting to save the life of another person,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 241

 Marginal note: Duty to safeguard opening in ice
 263   (1)  Every one who makes or causes to be made an opening in ice that is open to or frequented by the public is under a legal duty to guard it in a manner that is adequate to prevent persons from falling in by accident and is adequate to warn them that the opening exists.

 Marginal note: Excavation on land
 (2)  Every one who leaves an excavation on land that he owns or of which he has charge or supervision is under a legal duty to guard it in a manner that is adequate to prevent persons from falling in by accident and is adequate to warn them that the excavation exists.

 Marginal note: Offences
 (3)  Every one who fails to perform a duty imposed by subsection (1) or (2) is guilty of
 (a)  manslaughter, if the death of any person results therefrom;

 (b)  an offence under section 269, if bodily harm to any person results therefrom; or

 (c)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 242
 1980-81-82-83, c. 125, s. 18

 Marginal note: Criminal harassment
 264   (1)  No person shall, without lawful authority and knowing that another person is harassed or recklessly as to whether the other person is harassed, engage in conduct referred to in subsection (2) that causes that other person reasonably, in all the circumstances, to fear for their safety or the safety of anyone known to them.

 Marginal note: Prohibited conduct
 (2)  The conduct mentioned in subsection (1) consists of
 (a)  repeatedly following from place to place the other person or anyone known to them;

 (b)  repeatedly communicating with, either directly or indirectly, the other person or anyone known to them;

 (c)  besetting or watching the dwelling-house, or place where the other person, or anyone known to them, resides, works, carries on business or happens to be; or

 (d)  engaging in threatening conduct directed at the other person or any member of their family.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  Every person who contravenes this section is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Factors to be considered
 (4)  Where a person is convicted of an offence under this section, the court imposing the sentence on the person shall consider as an aggravating factor that, at the time the offence was committed, the person contravened
 (a)  the terms or conditions of an order made pursuant to section 161 or a recognizance entered into pursuant to section 810, 810.1 or 810.2; or

 (b)  the terms or conditions of any other order or recognizance made or entered into under the common law or a provision of this or any other Act of Parliament or of a province that is similar in effect to an order or recognizance referred to in paragraph (a).

 Marginal note: Reasons
 (5)  Where the court is satisfied of the existence of an aggravating factor referred to in subsection (4), but decides not to give effect to it for sentencing purposes, the court shall give reasons for its decision.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 264
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 37
 1993, c. 45, s. 2
 1997, c. 16, s. 4, c. 17, s. 9
 2002, c. 13, s. 10

 Assaults
 Marginal note: Uttering threats
 264.1   (1)  Every one commits an offence who, in any manner, knowingly utters, conveys or causes any person to receive a threat
 (a)  to cause death or bodily harm to any person;

 (b)  to burn, destroy or damage real or personal property; or

 (c)  to kill, poison or injure an animal or bird that is the property of any person.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits an offence under paragraph (1)(a) is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (3)  Every one who commits an offence under paragraph (1)(b) or (c)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 38
 1994, c. 44, s. 16

 Marginal note: Assault
 265   (1)  A person commits an assault when
 (a)  without the consent of another person, he applies force intentionally to that other person, directly or indirectly;

 (b)  he attempts or threatens, by an act or a gesture, to apply force to another person, if he has, or causes that other person to believe on reasonable grounds that he has, present ability to effect his purpose; or

 (c)  while openly wearing or carrying a weapon or an imitation thereof, he accosts or impedes another person or begs.

 Marginal note: Application
 (2)  This section applies to all forms of assault, including sexual assault, sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm and aggravated sexual assault.

 Marginal note: Consent
 (3)  For the purposes of this section, no consent is obtained where the complainant submits or does not resist by reason of
 (a)  the application of force to the complainant or to a person other than the complainant;

 (b)  threats or fear of the application of force to the complainant or to a person other than the complainant;

 (c)  fraud; or

 (d)  the exercise of authority.

 Marginal note: Accused’s belief as to consent
 (4)  Where an accused alleges that he believed that the complainant consented to the conduct that is the subject-matter of the charge, a judge, if satisfied that there is sufficient evidence and that, if believed by the jury, the evidence would constitute a defence, shall instruct the jury, when reviewing all the evidence relating to the determination of the honesty of the accused’s belief, to consider the presence or absence of reasonable grounds for that belief.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 244
 1974-75-76, c. 93, s. 21
 1980-81-82-83, c. 125, s. 19

 Marginal note: Assault
 266  Every one who commits an assault is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 245
 1972, c. 13, s. 21
 1974-75-76, c. 93, s. 22
 1980-81-82-83, c. 125, s. 19

 Marginal note: Assault with a weapon or causing bodily harm
 267  Every one who, in committing an assault,
 (a)  carries, uses or threatens to use a weapon or an imitation thereof, or

 (b)  causes bodily harm to the complainant,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 267
 1994, c. 44, s. 17

 Marginal note: Aggravated assault
 268   (1)  Every one commits an aggravated assault who wounds, maims, disfigures or endangers the life of the complainant.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits an aggravated assault is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 Marginal note: Excision
 (3)  For greater certainty, in this section, “wounds” or “maims” includes to excise, infibulate or mutilate, in whole or in part, the labia majora, labia minora or clitoris of a person, except where
 (a)  a surgical procedure is performed, by a person duly qualified by provincial law to practise medicine, for the benefit of the physical health of the person or for the purpose of that person having normal reproductive functions or normal sexual appearance or function; or

 (b)  the person is at least eighteen years of age and there is no resulting bodily harm.

 Marginal note: Consent
 (4)  For the purposes of this section and section 265, no consent to the excision, infibulation or mutilation, in whole or in part, of the labia majora, labia minora or clitoris of a person is valid, except in the cases described in paragraphs (3)(a) and (b).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 268
 1997, c. 16, s. 5

 Marginal note: Unlawfully causing bodily harm
 269  Every one who unlawfully causes bodily harm to any person is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 269
 1994, c. 44, s. 18

 Marginal note: Torture
 269.1   (1)  Every official, or every person acting at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of an official, who inflicts torture on any other person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 Marginal note: Definitions
 (2)  For the purposes of this section,
 official official  means
 (a)  a peace officer,

 (b)  a public officer,

 (c)  a member of the Canadian Forces, or

 (d)  any person who may exercise powers, pursuant to a law in force in a foreign state, that would, in Canada, be exercised by a person referred to in paragraph (a), (b), or (c),

 whether the person exercises powers in Canada or outside Canada; ( fonctionnaire )
 torture torture  means any act or omission by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person
 (a)  for a purpose including
 (i)  obtaining from the person or from a third person information or a statement,

 (ii)  punishing the person for an act that the person or a third person has committed or is suspected of having committed, and

 (iii)  intimidating or coercing the person or a third person, or

 (b)  for any reason based on discrimination of any kind,

 but does not include any act or omission arising only from, inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions. ( torture )

 Marginal note: No defence
 (3)  It is no defence to a charge under this section that the accused was ordered by a superior or a public authority to perform the act or omission that forms the subject-matter of the charge or that the act or omission is alleged to have been justified by exceptional circumstances, including a state of war, a threat of war, internal political instability or any other public emergency.

 Marginal note: Evidence
 (4)  In any proceedings over which Parliament has jurisdiction, any statement obtained as a result of the commission of an offence under this section is inadmissible in evidence, except as evidence that the statement was so obtained.

 R.S., 1985, c. 10 (3rd Supp.), s. 2

 Marginal note: Assaulting a peace officer
 270   (1)  Every one commits an offence who
 (a)  assaults a public officer or peace officer engaged in the execution of his duty or a person acting in aid of such an officer;

 (b)  assaults a person with intent to resist or prevent the lawful arrest or detention of himself or another person; or

 (c)  assaults a person
 (i)  who is engaged in the lawful execution of a process against lands or goods or in making a lawful distress or seizure, or

 (ii)  with intent to rescue anything taken under lawful process, distress or seizure.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 246
 1972, c. 13, s. 22
 1980-81-82-83, c. 125, s. 19

 Marginal note: Disarming a peace officer
 270.1   (1)  Every one commits an offence who, without the consent of a peace officer, takes or attempts to take a weapon that is in the possession of the peace officer when the peace officer is engaged in the execution of his or her duty.

 Marginal note: Definition of weapon
 (2)  For the purpose of subsection (1), weapon means any thing that is designed to be used to cause injury or death to, or to temporarily incapacitate, a person.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than five years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than eighteen months.

 2002, c. 13, s. 11

 Marginal note: Sexual assault
 271   (1)  Every one who commits a sexual assault is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months.

 (2)   [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 10]

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 271
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 10
 1994, c. 44, s. 19

 Marginal note: Sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm
 272   (1)  Every person commits an offence who, in committing a sexual assault,
 (a)  carries, uses or threatens to use a weapon or an imitation of a weapon;

 (b)  threatens to cause bodily harm to a person other than the complainant;

 (c)  causes bodily harm to the complainant; or

 (d)  is a party to the offence with any other person.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  where a firearm is used in the commission of the offence, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years; and

 (b)  in any other case, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 272
 1995, c. 39, s. 145

 Marginal note: Aggravated sexual assault
 273   (1)  Every one commits an aggravated sexual assault who, in committing a sexual assault, wounds, maims, disfigures or endangers the life of the complainant.

 Marginal note: Aggravated sexual assault
 (2)  Every person who commits an aggravated sexual assault is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  where a firearm is used in the commission of the offence, to imprisonment for life and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years; and

 (b)  in any other case, to imprisonment for life.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 273
 1995, c. 39, s. 146

 Marginal note: Meaning of consent
 273.1   (1)  Subject to subsection (2) and subsection 265(3), consent means, for the purposes of sections 271, 272 and 273, the voluntary agreement of the complainant to engage in the sexual activity in question.

 Marginal note: Where no consent obtained
 (2)  No consent is obtained, for the purposes of sections 271, 272 and 273, where
 (a)  the agreement is expressed by the words or conduct of a person other than the complainant;

 (b)  the complainant is incapable of consenting to the activity;

 (c)  the accused induces the complainant to engage in the activity by abusing a position of trust, power or authority;

 (d)  the complainant expresses, by words or conduct, a lack of agreement to engage in the activity; or

 (e)  the complainant, having consented to engage in sexual activity, expresses, by words or conduct, a lack of agreement to continue to engage in the activity.

 Marginal note: Subsection (2) not limiting
 (3)  Nothing in subsection (2) shall be construed as limiting the circumstances in which no consent is obtained.

 1992, c. 38, s. 1

 Marginal note: Where belief in consent not a defence
 273.2  It is not a defence to a charge under section 271, 272 or 273 that the accused believed that the complainant consented to the activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge, where
 (a)  the accused’s belief arose from the accused’s
 (i)  self-induced intoxication, or

 (ii)  recklessness or wilful blindness; or

 (b)  the accused did not take reasonable steps, in the circumstances known to the accused at the time, to ascertain that the complainant was consenting.

 1992, c. 38, s. 1

 Marginal note: Removal of child from Canada
 273.3   (1)  No person shall do anything for the purpose of removing from Canada a person who is ordinarily resident in Canada and who is
 (a)  under the age of fourteen years, with the intention that an act be committed outside Canada that if it were committed in Canada would be an offence against section 151 or 152 or subsection 160(3) or 173(2) in respect of that person;

 (b)  fourteen years of age or more but under the age of eighteen years, with the intention that an act be committed outside Canada that if it were committed in Canada would be an offence against section 153 in respect of that person; or

 (c)  under the age of eighteen years, with the intention that an act be committed outside Canada that if it were committed in Canada would be an offence against section 155 or 159, subsection 160(2) or section 170, 171, 267, 268, 269, 271, 272 or 273 in respect of that person.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every person who contravenes this section is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 1993, c. 45, s. 3
 1997, c. 18, s. 13

 Marginal note: Corroboration not required
 274  If an accused is charged with an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 159, 160, 170, 171, 172, 173, 212, 271, 272 or 273, no corroboration is required for a conviction and the judge shall not instruct the jury that it is unsafe to find the accused guilty in the absence of corroboration.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 274
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 11
 2002, c. 13, s. 12

 Marginal note: Rules respecting recent complaint abrogated
 275  The rules relating to evidence of recent complaint are hereby abrogated with respect to offences under sections 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155 and 159, subsections 160(2) and (3) and sections 170, 171, 172, 173, 271, 272 and 273.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 275
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 11
 2002, c. 13, s. 12

 Marginal note: Evidence of complainant’s sexual activity
 276   (1)  In proceedings in respect of an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155 or 159, subsection 160(2) or (3) or section 170, 171, 172, 173, 271, 272 or 273, evidence that the complainant has engaged in sexual activity, whether with the accused or with any other person, is not admissible to support an inference that, by reason of the sexual nature of that activity, the complainant
 (a)  is more likely to have consented to the sexual activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge; or

 (b)  is less worthy of belief.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (2)  In proceedings in respect of an offence referred to in subsection (1), no evidence shall be adduced by or on behalf of the accused that the complainant has engaged in sexual activity other than the sexual activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge, whether with the accused or with any other person, unless the judge, provincial court judge or justice determines, in accordance with the procedures set out in sections 276.1 and 276.2, that the evidence
 (a)  is of specific instances of sexual activity;

 (b)  is relevant to an issue at trial; and

 (c)  has significant probative value that is not substantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice to the proper administration of justice.

 Marginal note: Factors that judge must consider
 (3)  In determining whether evidence is admissible under subsection (2), the judge, provincial court judge or justice shall take into account
 (a)  the interests of justice, including the right of the accused to make a full answer and defence;

 (b)  society’s interest in encouraging the reporting of sexual assault offences;

 (c)  whether there is a reasonable prospect that the evidence will assist in arriving at a just determination in the case;

 (d)  the need to remove from the fact-finding process any discriminatory belief or bias;

 (e)  the risk that the evidence may unduly arouse sentiments of prejudice, sympathy or hostility in the jury;

 (f)  the potential prejudice to the complainant’s personal dignity and right of privacy;

 (g)  the right of the complainant and of every individual to personal security and to the full protection and benefit of the law; and

 (h)  any other factor that the judge, provincial court judge or justice considers relevant.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 276
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 12
 1992, c. 38, s. 2
 2002, c. 13, s. 13

 Marginal note: Application for hearing
 276.1   (1)  Application may be made to the judge, provincial court judge or justice by or on behalf of the accused for a hearing under section 276.2 to determine whether evidence is admissible under subsection 276(2).

 Marginal note: Form and content of application
 (2)  An application referred to in subsection (1) must be made in writing and set out
 (a)  detailed particulars of the evidence that the accused seeks to adduce, and

 (b)  the relevance of that evidence to an issue at trial,

 and a copy of the application must be given to the prosecutor and to the clerk of the court.

 Marginal note: Jury and public excluded
 (3)  The judge, provincial court judge or justice shall consider the application with the jury and the public excluded.

 Marginal note: Judge may decide to hold hearing
 (4)  Where the judge, provincial court judge or justice is satisfied
 (a)  that the application was made in accordance with subsection (2),

 (b)  that a copy of the application was given to the prosecutor and to the clerk of the court at least seven days previously, or such shorter interval as the judge, provincial court judge or justice may allow where the interests of justice so require, and

 (c)  that the evidence sought to be adduced is capable of being admissible under subsection 276(2),

 the judge, provincial court judge or justice shall grant the application and hold a hearing under section 276.2 to determine whether the evidence is admissible under subsection 276(2).

 1992, c. 38, s. 2

 Marginal note: Jury and public excluded
 276.2   (1)  At a hearing to determine whether evidence is admissible under subsection 276(2), the jury and the public shall be excluded.

 Marginal note: Complainant not compellable
 (2)  The complainant is not a compellable witness at the hearing.

 Marginal note: Judge’s determination and reasons
 (3)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the judge, provincial court judge or justice shall determine whether the evidence, or any part thereof, is admissible under subsection 276(2) and shall provide reasons for that determination, and
 (a)  where not all of the evidence is to be admitted, the reasons must state the part of the evidence that is to be admitted;

 (b)  the reasons must state the factors referred to in subsection 276(3) that affected the determination; and

 (c)  where all or any part of the evidence is to be admitted, the reasons must state the manner in which that evidence is expected to be relevant to an issue at trial.

 Marginal note: Record of reasons
 (4)  The reasons provided under subsection (3) shall be entered in the record of the proceedings or, where the proceedings are not recorded, shall be provided in writing.

 1992, c. 38, s. 2

 Marginal note: Publication prohibited
 276.3   (1)  No person shall publish in any document, or broadcast or transmit in any way, any of the following:
 (a)  the contents of an application made under section 276.1;

 (b)  any evidence taken, the information given and the representations made at an application under section 276.1 or at a hearing under section 276.2;

 (c)  the decision of a judge or justice under subsection 276.1(4), unless the judge or justice, after taking into account the complain­ant’s right of privacy and the interests of justice, orders that the decision may be published, broadcast or transmitted; and

 (d)  the determination made and the reasons provided under section 276.2, unless
 (i)  that determination is that evidence is admissible, or

 (ii)  the judge or justice, after taking into account the complainant’s right of privacy and the interests of justice, orders that the determination and reasons may be published, broadcast or transmitted.

 Marginal note: Offence
 (2)  Every person who contravenes subsection (1) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 1992, c. 38, s. 2
 2005, c. 32, s. 13

 Marginal note: Judge to instruct jury re use of evidence
 276.4  Where evidence is admitted at trial pursuant to a determination made under section 276.2, the judge shall instruct the jury as to the uses that the jury may and may not make of that evidence.
 1992, c. 38, s. 2

 Marginal note: Appeal
 276.5  For the purposes of sections 675 and 676, a determination made under section 276.2 shall be deemed to be a question of law.
 1992, c. 38, s. 2

 Marginal note: Reputation evidence
 277  In proceedings in respect of an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155 or 159, subsection 160(2) or (3) or section 170, 171, 172, 173, 271, 272 or 273, evidence of sexual reputation, whether general or specific, is not admissible for the purpose of challenging or supporting the credibility of the complainant.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 277
 R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 13
 2002, c. 13, s. 14

 Marginal note: Spouse may be charged
 278  A husband or wife may be charged with an offence under section 271, 272 or 273 in respect of his or her spouse, whether or not the spouses were living together at the time the activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge occurred.
 1980-81-82-83, c. 125, s. 19

 Marginal note: Definition of record
 278.1  For the purposes of sections 278.2 to 278.9, record means any form of record that contains personal information for which there is a reasonable expectation of privacy and includes, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, medical, psychiatric, therapeutic, counselling, education, employment, child welfare, adoption and social services records, personal journals and diaries, and records containing personal information the production or disclosure of which is protected by any other Act of Parliament or a provincial legislature, but does not include records made by persons responsible for the investigation or prosecution of the offence.
 1997, c. 30, s. 1

 Marginal note: Production of record to accused
 278.2   (1)  No record relating to a complainant or a witness shall be produced to an accused in any proceedings in respect of
 (a)  an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 159, 160, 170, 171, 172, 173, 210, 211, 212, 213, 271, 272 or 273,

 (b)  an offence under section 144, 145, 149, 156, 245 or 246 of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read immediately before January 4, 1983, or

 (c)  an offence under section 146, 151, 153, 155, 157, 166 or 167 of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read immediately before January 1, 1988,

 or in any proceedings in respect of two or more offences that include an offence referred to in any of paragraphs (a) to (c), except in accordance with sections 278.3 to 278.91.

 Marginal note: Application of provisions
 (2)  Section 278.1, this section and sections 278.3 to 278.91 apply where a record is in the possession or control of any person, including the prosecutor in the proceedings, unless, in the case of a record in the possession or control of the prosecutor, the complainant or witness to whom the record relates has expressly waived the application of those sections.

 Marginal note: Duty of prosecutor to give notice
 (3)  In the case of a record in respect of which this section applies that is in the possession or control of the prosecutor, the prosecutor shall notify the accused that the record is in the prosecutor’s possession but, in doing so, the prosecutor shall not disclose the record’s contents.

 1997, c. 30, s. 1
 1998, c. 9, s. 3

 Marginal note: Application for production
 278.3   (1)  An accused who seeks production of a record referred to in subsection 278.2(1) must make an application to the judge before whom the accused is to be, or is being, tried.

 Marginal note: No application in other proceedings
 (2)  For greater certainty, an application under subsection (1) may not be made to a judge or justice presiding at any other proceedings, including a preliminary inquiry.

 Marginal note: Form and content of application
 (3)  An application must be made in writing and set out
 (a)  particulars identifying the record that the accused seeks to have produced and the name of the person who has possession or control of the record; and

 (b)  the grounds on which the accused relies to establish that the record is likely relevant to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify.

 Marginal note: Insufficient grounds
 (4)  Any one or more of the following assertions by the accused are not sufficient on their own to establish that the record is likely relevant to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify:
 (a)  that the record exists;

 (b)  that the record relates to medical or psychiatric treatment, therapy or counselling that the complainant or witness has received or is receiving;

 (c)  that the record relates to the incident that is the subject-matter of the proceedings;

 (d)  that the record may disclose a prior inconsistent statement of the complainant or witness;

 (e)  that the record may relate to the credibility of the complainant or witness;

 (f)  that the record may relate to the reliability of the testimony of the complainant or witness merely because the complainant or witness has received or is receiving psychiatric treatment, therapy or counselling;

 (g)  that the record may reveal allegations of sexual abuse of the complainant by a person other than the accused;

 (h)  that the record relates to the sexual activity of the complainant with any person, including the accused;

 (i)  that the record relates to the presence or absence of a recent complaint;

 (j)  that the record relates to the complainant’s sexual reputation; or

 (k)  that the record was made close in time to a complaint or to the activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge against the accused.

 Marginal note: Service of application and subpoena
 (5)  The accused shall serve the application on the prosecutor, on the person who has possession or control of the record, on the complainant or witness, as the case may be, and on any other person to whom, to the knowledge of the accused, the record relates, at least seven days before the hearing referred to in subsection 278.4(1) or any shorter interval that the judge may allow in the interests of justice. The accused shall also serve a subpoena issued under Part XXII in Form 16.1 on the person who has possession or control of the record at the same time as the application is served.

 Marginal note: Service on other persons
 (6)  The judge may at any time order that the application be served on any person to whom the judge considers the record may relate.

 1997, c. 30, s. 1

 Marginal note: Hearing in camera
 278.4   (1)  The judge shall hold a hearing in camera to determine whether to order the person who has possession or control of the record to produce it to the court for review by the judge.

 Marginal note: Persons who may appear at hearing
 (2)  The person who has possession or control of the record, the complainant or witness, as the case may be, and any other person to whom the record relates may appear and make submissions at the hearing, but they are not compellable as witnesses at the hearing.

 Marginal note: Costs
 (3)  No order for costs may be made against a person referred to in subsection (2) in respect of their participation in the hearing.

 1997, c. 30, s. 1

 Marginal note: Judge may order production of record for review
 278.5   (1)  The judge may order the person who has possession or control of the record to produce the record or part of the record to the court for review by the judge if, after the hearing referred to in subsection 278.4(1), the judge is satisfied that
 (a)  the application was made in accordance with subsections 278.3(2) to (6);

 (b)  the accused has established that the record is likely relevant to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify; and

 (c)  the production of the record is necessary in the interests of justice.

 Marginal note: Factors to be considered
 (2)  In determining whether to order the production of the record or part of the record for review pursuant to subsection (1), the judge shall consider the salutary and deleterious effects of the determination on the accused’s right to make a full answer and defence and on the right to privacy and equality of the complainant or witness, as the case may be, and any other person to whom the record relates. In particular, the judge shall take the following factors into account:
 (a)  the extent to which the record is necessary for the accused to make a full answer and defence;

 (b)  the probative value of the record;

 (c)  the nature and extent of the reasonable expectation of privacy with respect to the record;

 (d)  whether production of the record is based on a discriminatory belief or bias;

 (e)  the potential prejudice to the personal dignity and right to privacy of any person to whom the record relates;

 (f)  society’s interest in encouraging the reporting of sexual offences;

 (g)  society’s interest in encouraging the obtaining of treatment by complainants of sexual offences; and

 (h)  the effect of the determination on the integrity of the trial process.

 1997, c. 30, s. 1

 Marginal note: Review of record by judge
 278.6   (1)  Where the judge has ordered the production of the record or part of the record for review, the judge shall review it in the absence of the parties in order to determine whether the record or part of the record should be produced to the accused.

 Marginal note: Hearing in camera
 (2)  The judge may hold a hearing in camera if the judge considers that it will assist in making the determination.

 Marginal note: Provisions re hearing
 (3)  Subsections 278.4(2) and (3) apply in the case of a hearing under subsection (2).

 1997, c. 30, s. 1

 Marginal note: Judge may order production of record to accused
 278.7   (1)  Where the judge is satisfied that the record or part of the record is likely relevant to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify and its production is necessary in the interests of justice, the judge may order that the record or part of the record that is likely relevant be produced to the accused, subject to any conditions that may be imposed pursuant to subsection (3).

 Marginal note: Factors to be considered
 (2)  In determining whether to order the production of the record or part of the record to the accused, the judge shall consider the salutary and deleterious effects of the determination on the accused’s right to make a full answer and defence and on the right to privacy and equality of the complainant or witness, as the case may be, and any other person to whom the record relates and, in particular, shall take the factors specified in paragraphs 278.5(2)(a) to (h) into account.

 Marginal note: Conditions on production
 (3)  Where the judge orders the production of the record or part of the record to the accused, the judge may impose conditions on the production to protect the interests of justice and, to the greatest extent possible, the privacy and equality interests of the complainant or witness, as the case may be, and any other person to whom the record relates, including, for example, the following conditions:
 (a)  that the record be edited as directed by the judge;

 (b)  that a copy of the record, rather than the original, be produced;

 (c)  that the accused and counsel for the accused not disclose the contents of the record to any other person, except with the approval of the court;

 (d)  that the record be viewed only at the offices of the court;

 (e)  that no copies of the record be made or that restrictions be imposed on the number of copies of the record that may be made; and

 (f)  that information regarding any person named in the record, such as their address, telephone number and place of employment, be severed from the record.

 Marginal note: Copy to prosecutor
 (4)  Where the judge orders the production of the record or part of the record to the accused, the judge shall direct that a copy of the record or part of the record be provided to the prosecutor, unless the judge determines that it is not in the interests of justice to do so.

 Marginal note: Record not to be used in other proceedings
 (5)  The record or part of the record that is produced to the accused pursuant to an order under subsection (1) shall not be used in any other proceedings.

 Marginal note: Retention of record by court
 (6)  Where the judge refuses to order the production of the record or part of the record to the accused, the record or part of the record shall, unless a court orders otherwise, be kept in a sealed package by the court until the later of the expiration of the time for any appeal and the completion of any appeal in the proceedings against the accused, whereupon the record or part of the record shall be returned to the person lawfully entitled to possession or control of it.

 1997, c. 30, s. 1

 Marginal note: Reasons for decision
 278.8   (1)  The judge shall provide reasons for ordering or refusing to order the production of the record or part of the record pursuant to subsection 278.5(1) or 278.7(1).

 Marginal note: Record of reasons
 (2)  The reasons referred to in subsection (1) shall be entered in the record of the proceedings or, where the proceedings are not recorded, shall be provided in writing.

 1997, c. 30, s. 1

 Marginal note: Publication prohibited
 278.9   (1)  No person shall publish in any document, or broadcast or transmit in any way, any of the following:
 (a)  the contents of an application made under section 278.3;

 (b)  any evidence taken, information given or submissions made at a hearing under subsection 278.4(1) or 278.6(2); or

 (c)  the determination of the judge pursuant to subsection 278.5(1) or 278.7(1) and the reasons provided pursuant to section 278.8, unless the judge, after taking into account the interests of justice and the right to privacy of the person to whom the record relates, orders that the determination may be published.

 Marginal note: Offence
 (2)  Every person who contravenes subsection (1) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 1997, c. 30, s. 1
 2005, c. 32, s. 14

 Marginal note: Appeal
 278.91  For the purposes of sections 675 and 676, a determination to make or refuse to make an order pursuant to subsection 278.5(1) or 278.7(1) is deemed to be a question of law.
 1997, c. 30, s. 1

 Kidnapping, Trafficking in Persons, Hostage Taking and Abduction
 Marginal note: Kidnapping
 279   (1)  Every person commits an offence who kidnaps a person with intent
 (a)  to cause the person to be confined or imprisoned against the person’s will;

 (b)  to cause the person to be unlawfully sent or transported out of Canada against the person’s will; or

 (c)  to hold the person for ransom or to service against the person’s will.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (1.1)  Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  where a firearm is used in the commission of the offence, to imprisonment for life and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years; and

 (b)  in any other case, to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Forcible confinement
 (2)  Every one who, without lawful authority, confines, imprisons or forcibly seizes another person is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months.

 Marginal note: Non-resistance
 (3)  In proceedings under this section, the fact that the person in relation to whom the offence is alleged to have been committed did not resist is not a defence unless the accused proves that the failure to resist was not caused by threats, duress, force or exhibition of force.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 279
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 39
 1995, c. 39, s. 147
 1997, c. 18, s. 14

 Marginal note: Trafficking in persons
 279.01   (1)  Every person who recruits, transports, transfers, receives, holds, conceals or harbours a person, or exercises control, direction or influence over the movements of a person, for the purpose of exploiting them or facilitating their exploitation is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  to imprisonment for life if they kidnap, commit an aggravated assault or aggravated sexual assault against, or cause death to, the victim during the commission of the offence; or

 (b)  to imprisonment for a term of not more than fourteen years in any other case.

 Marginal note: Consent
 (2)  No consent to the activity that forms the subject-matter of a charge under subsection (1) is valid.

 2005, c. 43, s. 3

 Marginal note: Material benefit
 279.02  Every person who receives a financial or other material benefit, knowing that it results from the commission of an offence under subsection 279.01(1), is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than ten years.
 2005, c. 43, s. 3

 Marginal note: Withholding or destroying documents
 279.03  Every person who, for the purpose of committing or facilitating an offence under subsection 279.01(1), conceals, removes, withholds or destroys any travel document that belongs to another person or any document that establishes or purports to establish another person’s identity or immigration status is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than five years, whether or not the document is of Canadian origin or is authentic.
 2005, c. 43, s. 3

 Marginal note: Exploitation
 279.04  For the purposes of sections 279.01 to 279.03, a person exploits another person if they
 (a)  cause them to provide, or offer to provide, labour or a service by engaging in conduct that, in all the circumstances, could reasonably be expected to cause the other person to believe that their safety or the safety of a person known to them would be threatened if they failed to provide, or offer to provide, the labour or service; or

 (b)  cause them, by means of deception or the use or threat of force or of any other form of coercion, to have an organ or tissue removed.

 2005, c. 43, s. 3

 Marginal note: Hostage taking
 279.1   (1)  Every one takes a person hostage who
 (a)  confines, imprisons, forcibly seizes or detains that person, and

 (b)  in any manner utters, conveys or causes any person to receive a threat that the death of, or bodily harm to, the hostage will be caused or that the confinement, imprisonment or detention of the hostage will be continued

 with intent to induce any person, other than the hostage, or any group of persons or any state or international or intergovernmental organization to commit or cause to be committed any act or omission as a condition, whether express or implied, of the release of the hostage.

 Marginal note: Hostage-taking
 (2)  Every person who takes a person hostage is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  where a firearm is used in the commission of the offence, to imprisonment for life and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years; and

 (b)  in any other case, to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Non-resistance
 (3)  Subsection 279(3) applies to proceedings under this section as if the offence under this section were an offence under section 279.

 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 40
 1995, c. 39, s. 148

 Marginal note: Abduction of person under sixteen
 280   (1)  Every one who, without lawful authority, takes or causes to be taken an unmarried person under the age of sixteen years out of the possession of and against the will of the parent or guardian of that person or of any other person who has the lawful care or charge of that person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Definition of guardian
 (2)  In this section and sections 281 to 283, guardian includes any person who has in law or in fact the custody or control of another person.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 249
 1980-81-82-83, c. 125, s. 20

 Marginal note: Abduction of person under fourteen
 281  Every one who, not being the parent, guardian or person having the lawful care or charge of a person under the age of fourteen years, unlawfully takes, entices away, conceals, detains, receives or harbours that person with intent to deprive a parent or guardian, or any other person who has the lawful care or charge of that person, of the possession of that person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 250
 1980-81-82-83, c. 125, s. 20

 Marginal note: Abduction in contravention of custody order
 282   (1)  Every one who, being the parent, guardian or person having the lawful care or charge of a person under the age of fourteen years, takes, entices away, conceals, detains, receives or harbours that person, in contravention of the custody provisions of a custody order in relation to that person made by a court anywhere in Canada, with intent to deprive a parent or guardian, or any other person who has the lawful care or charge of that person, of the possession of that person is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Where no belief in validity of custody order
 (2)  Where a count charges an offence under subsection (1) and the offence is not proven only because the accused did not believe that there was a valid custody order but the evidence does prove an offence under section 283, the accused may be convicted of an offence under section 283.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 282
 1993, c. 45, s. 4

 Marginal note: Abduction
 283   (1)  Every one who, being the parent, guardian or person having the lawful care or charge of a person under the age of fourteen years, takes, entices away, conceals, detains, receives or harbours that person, whether or not there is a custody order in relation to that person made by a court anywhere in Canada, with intent to deprive a parent or guardian, or any other person who has the lawful care or charge of that person, of the possession of that person, is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Consent required
 (2)  No proceedings may be commenced under subsection (1) without the consent of the Attorney General or counsel instructed by him for that purpose.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 283
 1993, c. 45, s. 5

 Marginal note: Defence
 284  No one shall be found guilty of an offence under sections 281 to 283 if he establishes that the taking, enticing away, concealing, detaining, receiving or harbouring of any young person was done with the consent of the parent, guardian or other person having the lawful possession, care or charge of that young person.
 1980-81-82-83, c. 125, s. 20

 Marginal note: Defence
 285  No one shall be found guilty of an offence under sections 280 to 283 if the court is satisfied that the taking, enticing away, concealing, detaining, receiving or harbouring of any young person was necessary to protect the young person from danger of imminent harm or if the person charged with the offence was escaping from danger of imminent harm.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 285
 1993, c. 45, s. 6

 Marginal note: No defence
 286  In proceedings in respect of an offence under sections 280 to 283, it is not a defence to any charge that a young person consented to or suggested any conduct of the accused.
 1980-81-82-83, c. 125, s. 20

 Abortion
 Marginal note: Procuring miscarriage
 287   (1)  Every one who, with intent to procure the miscarriage of a female person, whether or not she is pregnant, uses any means for the purpose of carrying out his intention is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Woman procuring her own miscarriage
 (2)  Every female person who, being pregnant, with intent to procure her own miscarriage, uses any means or permits any means to be used for the purpose of carrying out her intention is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Definition of means
 (3)  In this section, means includes
 (a)  the administration of a drug or other noxious thing;

 (b)  the use of an instrument; and

 (c)  manipulation of any kind.

 Marginal note: Exceptions
 (4)  Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to
 (a)  a qualified medical practitioner, other than a member of a therapeutic abortion committee for any hospital, who in good faith uses in an accredited or approved hospital any means for the purpose of carrying out his intention to procure the miscarriage of a female person, or

 (b)  a female person who, being pregnant, permits a qualified medical practitioner to use in an accredited or approved hospital any means for the purpose of carrying out her intention to procure her own miscarriage,

 if, before the use of those means, the therapeutic abortion committee for that accredited or approved hospital, by a majority of the members of the committee and at a meeting of the committee at which the case of the female person has been reviewed,
 (c)  has by certificate in writing stated that in its opinion the continuation of the pregnancy of the female person would or would be likely to endanger her life or health, and

 (d)  has caused a copy of that certificate to be given to the qualified medical practitioner.

 Marginal note: Information requirement
 (5)  The Minister of Health of a province may by order
 (a)  require a therapeutic abortion committee for any hospital in that province, or any member thereof, to furnish him with a copy of any certificate described in paragraph (4)(c) issued by that committee, together with such other information relating to the circumstances surrounding the issue of that certificate as he may require; or

 (b)  require a medical practitioner who, in that province, has procured the miscarriage of any female person named in a certificate described in paragraph (4)(c), to furnish him with a copy of that certificate, together with such other information relating to the procuring of the miscarriage as he may require.

 Marginal note: Definitions
 (6)  For the purposes of subsections (4) and (5) and this subsection,
 accredited hospital
 hôpital accrédité
 accredited hospital means a hospital accredited by the Canadian Council on Hospital Accreditation in which diagnostic services and medical, surgical and obstetrical treatment are provided; ( hôpital accrédité )
 approved hospital
 hôpital approuvé
 approved hospital means a hospital in a province approved for the purposes of this section by the Minister of Health of that province; ( hôpital approuvé )
 board
 conseil
 board means the board of governors, management or directors, or the trustees, commission or other person or group of persons having the control and management of an accredited or approved hospital; ( conseil )
 Minister of Health
 ministre de la Santé
 Minister of Health means
 (a)  in the Provinces of Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, Manitoba and Newfoundland, the Minister of Health,

 (b)  in the Provinces of Nova Scotia and Saskatchewan, the Minister of Public Health, and

 (c)  in the Province of British Columbia, the Minister of Health Services and Hospital Insurance,

 (d)  in the Province of Alberta, the Minister of Hospitals and Medical Care,

 (e)  in Yukon, the Northwest Territories and Nunavut, the Minister of Health; ( ministre de la Santé )

 qualified medical practitioner
 médecin qualifié
 qualified medical practitioner means a person entitled to engage in the practice of medicine under the laws of the province in which the hospital referred to in subsection (4) is situated; ( médecin qualifié )
 therapeutic abortion committee
 comité de l’avortement thérapeutique
 therapeutic abortion committee for any hospital means a committee, comprised of not less than three members each of whom is a qualified medical practitioner, appointed by the board of that hospital for the purpose of considering and determining questions relating to terminations of pregnancy within that hospital. ( comité de l’avortement thérapeutique )

 Marginal note: Requirement of consent not affected
 (7)  Nothing in subsection (4) shall be construed as making unnecessary the obtaining of any authorization or consent that is or may be required, otherwise than under this Act, before any means are used for the purpose of carrying out an intention to procure the miscarriage of a female person.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 287
 1993, c. 28, s. 78
 1996, c. 8, s. 32
 2002, c. 7, s. 141

 Marginal note: Supplying noxious things
 288  Every one who unlawfully supplies or procures a drug or other noxious thing or an instrument or thing, knowing that it is intended to be used or employed to procure the miscarriage of a female person, whether or not she is pregnant, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 252

 Venereal Diseases
 289   [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 41]
 Offences Against Conjugal Rights
 Marginal note: Bigamy
 290   (1)  Every one commits bigamy who
 (a)  in Canada,
 (i)  being married, goes through a form of marriage with another person,

 (ii)  knowing that another person is married, goes through a form of marriage with that person, or

 (iii)  on the same day or simultaneously, goes through a form of marriage with more than one person; or

 (b)  being a Canadian citizen resident in Canada leaves Canada with intent to do anything mentioned in subparagraphs (a)(i) to (iii) and, pursuant thereto, does outside Canada anything mentioned in those subparagraphs in circumstances mentioned therein.

 Marginal note: Matters of defence
 (2)  No person commits bigamy by going through a form of marriage if
 (a)  that person in good faith and on reasonable grounds believes that his spouse is dead;

 (b)  the spouse of that person has been continuously absent from him for seven years immediately preceding the time when he goes through the form of marriage, unless he knew that his spouse was alive at any time during those seven years;

 (c)  that person has been divorced from the bond of the first marriage; or

 (d)  the former marriage has been declared void by a court of competent jurisdiction.

 Marginal note: Incompetency no defence
 (3)  Where a person is alleged to have committed bigamy, it is not a defence that the parties would, if unmarried, have been incompetent to contract marriage under the law of the place where the offence is alleged to have been committed.

 Marginal note: Validity presumed
 (4)  Every marriage or form of marriage shall, for the purpose of this section, be deemed to be valid unless the accused establishes that it was invalid.

 Marginal note: Act or omission by accused
 (5)  No act or omission on the part of an accused who is charged with bigamy invalidates a marriage or form of marriage that is otherwise valid.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 254

 Marginal note: Punishment
 291   (1)  Every one who commits bigamy is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Certificate of marriage
 (2)  For the purposes of this section, a certificate of marriage issued under the authority of law is evidence of the marriage or form of marriage to which it relates without proof of the signature or official character of the person by whom it purports to be signed.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 255

 Marginal note: Procuring feigned marriage
 292   (1)  Every person who procures or knowingly aids in procuring a feigned marriage between himself and another person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Corroboration
 (2)  No person shall be convicted of an offence under this section on the evidence of only one witness unless the evidence of that witness is corroborated in a material particular by evidence that implicates the accused.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 256
 1980-81-82-83, c. 125, s. 21

 Marginal note: Polygamy
 293   (1)  Every one who
 (a)  practises or enters into or in any manner agrees or consents to practise or enter into
 (i)  any form of polygamy, or

 (ii)  any kind of conjugal union with more than one person at the same time,

 whether or not it is by law recognized as a binding form of marriage, or

 (b)  celebrates, assists or is a party to a rite, ceremony, contract or consent that purports to sanction a relationship mentioned in subparagraph (a)(i) or (ii),

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Evidence in case of polygamy
 (2)  Where an accused is charged with an offence under this section, no averment or proof of the method by which the alleged relationship was entered into, agreed to or consented to is necessary in the indictment or on the trial of the accused, nor is it necessary on the trial to prove that the persons who are alleged to have entered into the relationship had or intended to have sexual intercourse.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 257

 Unlawful Solemnization of Marriage
 Marginal note: Pretending to solemnize marriage
 294  Every one who
 (a)  solemnizes or pretends to solemnize a marriage without lawful authority, the proof of which lies on him, or

 (b)  procures a person to solemnize a marriage knowing that he is not lawfully authorized to solemnize the marriage,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 258

 Marginal note: Marriage contrary to law
 295  Every one who, being lawfully authorized to solemnize marriage, knowingly and wilfully solemnizes a marriage in contravention of the laws of the province in which the marriage is solemnized is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 259

 Blasphemous Libel
 Marginal note: Offence
 296   (1)  Every one who publishes a blasphemous libel is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Question of fact
 (2)  It is a question of fact whether or not any matter that is published is a blasphemous libel.

 Marginal note: Saving
 (3)  No person shall be convicted of an offence under this section for expressing in good faith and in decent language, or attempting to establish by argument used in good faith and conveyed in decent language, an opinion on a religious subject.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 260

 Defamatory Libel
 Definition of newspaper
 297  In sections 303, 304 and 308, newspaper means any paper, magazine or periodical containing public news, intelligence or reports of events, or any remarks or observations thereon, printed for sale and published periodically or in parts or numbers, at intervals not exceeding thirty-one days between the publication of any two such papers, parts or numbers, and any paper, magazine or periodical printed in order to be dispersed and made public, weekly or more often, or at intervals not exceeding thirty-one days, that contains advertisements, exclusively or principally.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 261

 Marginal note: Definition
 298   (1)  A defamatory libel is matter published, without lawful justification or excuse, that is likely to injure the reputation of any person by exposing him to hatred, contempt or ridicule, or that is designed to insult the person of or concerning whom it is published.

 Marginal note: Mode of expression
 (2)  A defamatory libel may be expressed directly or by insinuation or irony
 (a)  in words legibly marked on any substance; or

 (b)  by any object signifying a defamatory libel otherwise than by words.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 262

 Marginal note: Publishing
 299  A person publishes a libel when he
 (a)  exhibits it in public;

 (b)  causes it to be read or seen; or

 (c)  shows or delivers it, or causes it to be shown or delivered, with intent that it should be read or seen by the person whom it defames or by any other person.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 263

 Marginal note: Punishment of libel known to be false
 300  Every one who publishes a defamatory libel that he knows is false is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 264

 Marginal note: Punishment for defamatory libel
 301  Every one who publishes a defamatory libel is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 265

 Marginal note: Extortion by libel
 302   (1)  Every one commits an offence who, with intent
 (a)  to extort money from any person, or

 (b)  to induce a person to confer on or procure for another person an appointment or office of profit or trust,

 publishes or threatens to publish or offers to abstain from publishing or to prevent the publication of a defamatory libel.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (2)  Every one commits an offence who, as the result of the refusal of any person to permit money to be extorted or to confer or procure an appointment or office of profit or trust, publishes or threatens to publish a defamatory libel.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  Every one who commits an offence under this section is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 266

 Marginal note: Proprietor of newspaper presumed responsible
 303   (1)  The proprietor of a newspaper shall be deemed to publish defamatory matter that is inserted and published therein, unless he proves that the defamatory matter was inserted in the newspaper without his knowledge and without negligence on his part.

 Marginal note: General authority to manager when negligence
 (2)  Where the proprietor of a newspaper gives to a person general authority to manage or conduct the newspaper as editor or otherwise, the insertion by that person of defamatory matter in the newspaper shall, for the purposes of subsection (1), be deemed not to be negligence on the part of the proprietor unless it is proved that
 (a)  he intended the general authority to include authority to insert defamatory matter in the newspaper; or

 (b)  he continued to confer general authority after he knew that it had been exercised by the insertion of defamatory matter in the newspaper.

 Marginal note: Selling newspapers
 (3)  No person shall be deemed to publish a defamatory libel by reason only that he sells a number or part of a newspaper that contains a defamatory libel, unless he knows that the number or part contains defamatory matter or that defamatory matter is habitually contained in the newspaper.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 267

 Marginal note: Selling book containing defamatory libel
 304   (1)  No person shall be deemed to publish a defamatory libel by reason only that he sells a book, magazine, pamphlet or other thing, other than a newspaper that contains defamatory matter, if, at the time of the sale, he does not know that it contains the defamatory matter.

 Marginal note: Sale by servant
 (2)  Where a servant, in the course of his employment, sells a book, magazine, pamphlet or other thing, other than a newspaper, the employer shall be deemed not to publish any defamatory matter contained therein unless it is proved that the employer authorized the sale knowing that
 (a)  defamatory matter was contained therein; or

 (b)  defamatory matter was habitually contained therein, in the case of a periodical.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 268

 Marginal note: Publishing proceedings of courts of justice
 305  No person shall be deemed to publish a defamatory libel by reason only that he publishes defamatory matter
 (a)  in a proceeding held before or under the authority of a court exercising judicial authority; or

 (b)  in an inquiry made under the authority of an Act or by order of Her Majesty, or under the authority of a public department or a department of the government of a province.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 269

 Marginal note: Parliamentary papers
 306  No person shall be deemed to publish a defamatory libel by reason only that he
 (a)  publishes to the Senate or House of Commons or to the legislature of a province defamatory matter contained in a petition to the Senate or House of Commons or to the legislature of a province, as the case may be;

 (b)  publishes by order or under the authority of the Senate or House of Commons or of the legislature of a province a paper containing defamatory matter; or

 (c)  publishes, in good faith and without ill-will to the person defamed, an extract from or abstract of a petition or paper mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b).

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 270

 Marginal note: Fair reports of parliamentary or judicial proceedings
 307   (1)  No person shall be deemed to publish a defamatory libel by reason only that he publishes in good faith, for the information of the public, a fair report of the proceedings of the Senate or House of Commons or the legislature of a province, or a committee thereof, or of the public proceedings before a court exercising judicial authority, or publishes, in good faith, any fair comment on any such proceedings.

 Marginal note: Divorce proceedings an exception
 (2)  This section does not apply to a person who publishes a report of evidence taken or offered in any proceeding before the Senate or House of Commons or any committee thereof, on a petition or bill relating to any matter of marriage or divorce, if the report is published without authority from or leave of the House in which the proceeding is held or is contrary to any rule, order or practice of that House.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 271

 Marginal note: Fair report of public meeting
 308  No person shall be deemed to publish a defamatory libel by reason only that he publishes in good faith, in a newspaper, a fair report of the proceedings of any public meeting if
 (a)  the meeting is lawfully convened for a lawful purpose and is open to the public;

 (b)  the report is fair and accurate;

 (c)  the publication of the matter complained of is for the public benefit; and

 (d)  he does not refuse to publish in a conspicuous place in the newspaper a reasonable explanation or contradiction by the person defamed in respect of the defamatory matter.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 272

 Marginal note: Public benefit
 309  No person shall be deemed to publish a defamatory libel by reason only that he publishes defamatory matter that, on reasonable grounds, he believes is true, and that is relevant to any subject of public interest, the public discussion of which is for the public benefit.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 273

 Marginal note: Fair comment on public person or work of art
 310  No person shall be deemed to publish a defamatory libel by reason only that he publishes fair comments
 (a)  on the public conduct of a person who takes part in public affairs; or

 (b)  on a published book or other literary production, or on any composition or work of art or performance publicly exhibited, or on any other communication made to the public on any subject, if the comments are confined to criticism thereof.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 274

 Marginal note: When truth a defence
 311  No person shall be deemed to publish a defamatory libel where he proves that the publication of the defamatory matter in the manner in which it was published was for the public benefit at the time when it was published and that the matter itself was true.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 275

 Marginal note: Publication invited or necessary
 312  No person shall be deemed to publish a defamatory libel by reason only that he publishes defamatory matter
 (a)  on the invitation or challenge of the person in respect of whom it is published, or

 (b)  that it is necessary to publish in order to refute defamatory matter published in respect of him by another person,

 if he believes that the defamatory matter is true and it is relevant to the invitation, challenge or necessary refutation, as the case may be, and does not in any respect exceed what is reasonably sufficient in the circumstances.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 276

 Marginal note: Answer to inquiries
 313  No person shall be deemed to publish a defamatory libel by reason only that he publishes, in answer to inquiries made to him, defamatory matter relating to a subject-matter in respect of which the person by whom or on whose behalf the inquiries are made has an interest in knowing the truth or who, on reasonable grounds, the person who publishes the defamatory matter believes has such an interest, if
 (a)  the matter is published, in good faith, for the purpose of giving information in answer to the inquiries;

 (b)  the person who publishes the defamatory matter believes that it is true;

 (c)  the defamatory matter is relevant to the inquiries; and

 (d)  the defamatory matter does not in any respect exceed what is reasonably sufficient in the circumstances.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 277

 Marginal note: Giving information to person interested
 314  No person shall be deemed to publish a defamatory libel by reason only that he publishes to another person defamatory matter for the purpose of giving information to that person with respect to a subject-matter in which the person to whom the information is given has, or is believed on reasonable grounds by the person who gives it to have, an interest in knowing the truth with respect to that subject-matter if
 (a)  the conduct of the person who gives the information is reasonable in the circumstances;

 (b)  the defamatory matter is relevant to the subject-matter; and

 (c)  the defamatory matter is true, or if it is not true, is made without ill-will toward the person who is defamed and is made in the belief, on reasonable grounds, that it is true.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 278

 Marginal note: Publication in good faith for redress of wrong
 315  No person shall be deemed to publish a defamatory libel by reason only that he publishes defamatory matter in good faith for the purpose of seeking remedy or redress for a private or public wrong or grievance from a person who has, or who on reasonable grounds he believes has, the right or is under an obligation to remedy or redress the wrong or grievance, if
 (a)  he believes that the defamatory matter is true;

 (b)  the defamatory matter is relevant to the remedy or redress that is sought; and

 (c)  the defamatory matter does not in any respect exceed what is reasonably sufficient in the circumstances.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 279

 Marginal note: Proving publication by order of legislature
 316   (1)  An accused who is alleged to have published a defamatory libel may, at any stage of the proceedings, adduce evidence to prove that the matter that is alleged to be defamatory was contained in a paper published by order or under the authority of the Senate or House of Commons or the legislature of a province.

 Marginal note: Directing verdict
 (2)  Where at any stage in proceedings referred to in subsection (1) the court, judge, justice or provincial court judge is satisfied that the matter alleged to be defamatory was contained in a paper published by order or under the authority of the Senate or House of Commons or the legislature of a province, he shall direct a verdict of not guilty to be entered and shall discharge the accused.

 Marginal note: Certificate of order
 (3)  For the purposes of this section, a certificate under the hand of the Speaker or clerk of the Senate or House of Commons or the legislature of a province to the effect that the matter that is alleged to be defamatory was contained in a paper published by order or under the authority of the Senate, House of Commons or the legislature of a province, as the case may be, is conclusive evidence thereof.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 316
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 203

 Verdicts
 Marginal note: Verdicts in cases of defamatory libel
 317  Where, on the trial of an indictment for publishing a defamatory libel, a plea of not guilty is pleaded, the jury that is sworn to try the issue may give a general verdict of guilty or not guilty on the whole matter put in issue on the indictment, and shall not be required or directed by the judge to find the defendant guilty merely on proof of publication by the defendant of the alleged defamatory libel, and of the sense ascribed thereto in the indictment, but the judge may, in his discretion, give a direction or opinion to the jury on the matter in issue as in other criminal proceedings, and the jury may, on the issue, find a special verdict.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 281

 Hate Propaganda
 Marginal note: Advocating genocide
 318   (1)  Every one who advocates or promotes genocide is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Definition of “genocide”
 (2)  In this section, genocide means any of the following acts committed with intent to destroy in whole or in part any identifiable group, namely,
 (a)  killing members of the group; or

 (b)  deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction.

 Marginal note: Consent
 (3)  No proceeding for an offence under this section shall be instituted without the consent of the Attorney General.

 Definition of identifiable group
 (4)  In this section, identifiable group means any section of the public distinguished by colour, race, religion, ethnic origin or sexual orientation.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 318
 2004, c. 14, s. 1

 Marginal note: Public incitement of hatred
 319   (1)  Every one who, by communicating statements in any public place, incites hatred against any identifiable group where such incitement is likely to lead to a breach of the peace is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Wilful promotion of hatred
 (2)  Every one who, by communicating statements, other than in private conversation, wilfully promotes hatred against any identifiable group is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Defences
 (3)  No person shall be convicted of an offence under subsection (2)
 (a)  if he establishes that the statements communicated were true;

 (b)  if, in good faith, the person expressed or attempted to establish by an argument an opinion on a religious subject or an opinion based on a belief in a religious text;

 (c)  if the statements were relevant to any subject of public interest, the discussion of which was for the public benefit, and if on reasonable grounds he believed them to be true; or

 (d)  if, in good faith, he intended to point out, for the purpose of removal, matters producing or tending to produce feelings of hatred toward an identifiable group in Canada.

 Marginal note: Forfeiture
 (4)  Where a person is convicted of an offence under section 318 or subsection (1) or (2) of this section, anything by means of or in relation to which the offence was committed, on such conviction, may, in addition to any other punishment imposed, be ordered by the presiding provincial court judge or judge to be forfeited to Her Majesty in right of the province in which that person is convicted, for disposal as the Attorney General may direct.

 Marginal note: Exemption from seizure of communication facilities
 (5)  Subsections 199(6) and (7) apply with such modifications as the circumstances require to section 318 or subsection (1) or (2) of this section.

 Marginal note: Consent
 (6)  No proceeding for an offence under subsection (2) shall be instituted without the consent of the Attorney General.

 Marginal note: Definitions
 (7)  In this section,
 communicating communicating  includes communicating by telephone, broadcasting or other audible or visible means; ( communiquer )
 identifiable group identifiable group  has the same meaning as in section 318; ( groupe identifiable )
 public place public place  includes any place to which the public have access as of right or by invitation, express or implied; ( endroit public )
 statements statements  includes words spoken or written or recorded electronically or electro-magnetically or otherwise, and gestures, signs or other visible representations. ( déclarations )

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 319
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 203
 2004, c. 14, s. 2

 Marginal note: Warrant of seizure
 320   (1)  A judge who is satisfied by information on oath that there are reasonable grounds for believing that any publication, copies of which are kept for sale or distribution in premises within the jurisdiction of the court, is hate propaganda shall issue a warrant under his hand authorizing seizure of the copies.

 Marginal note: Summons to occupier
 (2)  Within seven days of the issue of a warrant under subsection (1), the judge shall issue a summons to the occupier of the premises requiring him to appear before the court and show cause why the matter seized should not be forfeited to Her Majesty.

 Marginal note: Owner and author may appear
 (3)  The owner and the author of the matter seized under subsection (1) and alleged to be hate propaganda may appear and be represented in the proceedings in order to oppose the making of an order for the forfeiture of the matter.

 Marginal note: Order of forfeiture
 (4)  If the court is satisfied that the publication referred to in subsection (1) is hate propaganda, it shall make an order declaring the matter forfeited to Her Majesty in right of the province in which the proceedings take place, for disposal as the Attorney General may direct.

 Marginal note: Disposal of matter
 (5)  If the court is not satisfied that the publication referred to in subsection (1) is hate propaganda, it shall order that the matter be restored to the person from whom it was seized forthwith after the time for final appeal has expired.

 Marginal note: Appeal
 (6)  An appeal lies from an order made under subsection (4) or (5) by any person who appeared in the proceedings
 (a)  on any ground of appeal that involves a question of law alone,

 (b)  on any ground of appeal that involves a question of fact alone, or

 (c)  on any ground of appeal that involves a question of mixed law and fact,

 as if it were an appeal against conviction or against a judgment or verdict of acquittal, as the case may be, on a question of law alone under Part XXI, and sections 673 to 696 apply with such modifications as the circumstances require.

 Marginal note: Consent
 (7)  No proceeding under this section shall be instituted without the consent of the Attorney General.

 Marginal note: Definitions
 (8)  In this section,
 court
 tribunal
 court means
 (a)  in the Province of Quebec, the Court of Quebec,

 (a.1)  in the Province of Ontario, the Superior Court of Justice,

 (b)  in the Provinces of New Brunswick, Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta, the Court of Queen’s Bench,

 (c)  in the Provinces of Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland, the Supreme Court, Trial Division,

 (c.1)   [Repealed, 1992, c. 51, s. 36]

 (d)  in the Provinces of Nova Scotia and British Columbia, in Yukon and in the Northwest Territories, the Supreme Court, and

 (e)  in Nunavut, the Nunavut Court of Justice; ( tribunal )

 genocide
 génocide
 genocide has the same meaning as in section 318; ( génocide )
 hate propaganda
 propagande haineuse
 hate propaganda means any writing, sign or visible representation that advocates or promotes genocide or the communication of which by any person would constitute an offence under section 319; ( propagande haineuse )
 judge
 juge
 judge means a judge of a court. ( juge )

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 320
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (2nd Supp.), s. 10, c. 40 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1990, c. 16, s. 4, c. 17, s. 11
 1992, c. 1, s. 58, c. 51, s. 36
 1998, c. 30, s. 14
 1999, c. 3, s. 29
 2002, c. 7, s. 142

 Marginal note: Warrant of seizure
 320.1   (1)  If a judge is satisfied by information on oath that there are reasonable grounds for believing that there is material that is hate propaganda within the meaning of subsection 320(8) or data within the meaning of subsection 342.1(2) that makes hate propaganda available, that is stored on and made available to the public through a computer system within the meaning of subsection 342.1(2) that is within the jurisdiction of the court, the judge may order the custodian of the computer system to
 (a)  give an electronic copy of the material to the court;

 (b)  ensure that the material is no longer stored on and made available through the computer system; and

 (c)  provide the information necessary to identify and locate the person who posted the material.

 Marginal note: Notice to person who posted the material
 (2)  Within a reasonable time after receiving the information referred to in paragraph (1)(c), the judge shall cause notice to be given to the person who posted the material, giving that person the opportunity to appear and be represented before the court and show cause why the material should not be deleted. If the person cannot be identified or located or does not reside in Canada, the judge may order the custodian of the computer system to post the text of the notice at the location where the material was previously stored and made available, until the time set for the appearance.

 Marginal note: Person who posted the material may appear
 (3)  The person who posted the material may appear and be represented in the proceedings in order to oppose the making of an order under subsection (5).

 Marginal note: Non-appearance
 (4)  If the person who posted the material does not appear for the proceedings, the court may proceed ex parte to hear and determine the proceedings in the absence of the person as fully and effectually as if the person had appeared.

 Marginal note: Order
 (5)  If the court is satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that the material is available to the public and is hate propaganda within the meaning of subsection 320(8) or data within the meaning of subsection 342.1(2) that makes hate propaganda available, it may order the custodian of the computer system to delete the material.

 Marginal note: Destruction of copy
 (6)  When the court makes the order for the deletion of the material, it may order the destruction of the electronic copy in the court’s possession.

 Marginal note: Return of material
 (7)  If the court is not satisfied that the material is available to the public and is hate propaganda within the meaning of subsection 320(8) or data within the meaning of subsection 342.1(2) that makes hate propaganda available, the court shall order that the electronic copy be returned to the custodian and terminate the order under paragraph (1)(b).

 Marginal note: Other provisions to apply
 (8)  Subsections 320(6) to (8) apply, with any modifications that the circumstances require, to this section.

 Marginal note: When order takes effect
 (9)  No order made under subsections (5) to (7) takes effect until the time for final appeal has expired.

 2001, c. 41, s. 10

 PART IX Offences Against Rights of Property
 Interpretation
 Marginal note: Definitions
 321  In this Part,
 break break  means
 (a)  to break any part, internal or external, or

 (b)  to open any thing that is used or intended to be used to close or to cover an internal or external opening; ( effraction )

 credit card credit card  means any card, plate, coupon book or other device issued or otherwise distributed for the purpose of being used
 (a)  on presentation to obtain, on credit, money, goods, services or any other thing of value, or

 (b)  in an automated teller machine, a remote service unit or a similar automated banking device to obtain any of the services offered through the machine, unit or device; ( carte de crédit )

 document document  means any paper, parchment or other material on which is recorded or marked anything that is capable of being read or understood by a person, computer system or other device, and includes a credit card, but does not include trade-marks on articles of commerce or inscriptions on stone or metal or other like material; ( document )
 exchequer bill exchequer bill  means a bank-note, bond, note, debenture or security that is issued or guaranteed by Her Majesty under the authority of Parliament or the legislature of a province; ( bon du Trésor )
 exchequer bill paper exchequer bill paper  means paper that is used to manufacture exchequer bills; ( papier de bons du Trésor )
 false document false document  means a document
 (a)  the whole or a material part of which purports to be made by or on behalf of a person
 (i)  who did not make it or authorize it to be made, or

 (ii)  who did not in fact exist,

 (b)  that is made by or on behalf of the person who purports to make it but is false in some material particular,

 (c)  that is made in the name of an existing person, by him or under his authority, with a fraudulent intention that it should pass as being made by a person, real or fictitious, other than the person who makes it or under whose authority it is made; ( faux document )

 revenue paper revenue paper  means paper that is used to make stamps, licences or permits or for any purpose connected with the public revenue. ( papier de revenu )
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 321
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 42

 Theft
 Marginal note: Theft
 322   (1)  Every one commits theft who fraudulently and without colour of right takes, or fraudulently and without colour of right converts to his use or to the use of another person, anything, whether animate or inanimate, with intent
 (a)  to deprive, temporarily or absolutely, the owner of it, or a person who has a special property or interest in it, of the thing or of his property or interest in it;

 (b)  to pledge it or deposit it as security;

 (c)  to part with it under a condition with respect to its return that the person who parts with it may be unable to perform; or

 (d)  to deal with it in such a manner that it cannot be restored in the condition in which it was at the time it was taken or converted.

 Marginal note: Time when theft completed
 (2)  A person commits theft when, with intent to steal anything, he moves it or causes it to move or to be moved, or begins to cause it to become movable.

 Marginal note: Secrecy
 (3)  A taking or conversion of anything may be fraudulent notwithstanding that it is effected without secrecy or attempt at concealment.

 Marginal note: Purpose of taking
 (4)  For the purposes of this Act, the question whether anything that is converted is taken for the purpose of conversion, or whether it is, at the time it is converted, in the lawful possession of the person who converts it is not material.

 Marginal note: Wild living creature
 (5)  For the purposes of this section, a person who has a wild living creature in captivity shall be deemed to have a special property or interest in it while it is in captivity and after it has escaped from captivity.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 283

 Marginal note: Oysters
 323   (1)  Where oysters and oyster brood are in oyster beds, layings or fisheries that are the property of any person and are sufficiently marked out or known as the property of that person, that person shall be deemed to have a special property or interest in them.

 Marginal note: Oyster bed
 (2)  An indictment is sufficient if it describes an oyster bed, laying or fishery by name or in any other way, without stating that it is situated in a particular territorial division.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 284

 Marginal note: Theft by bailee of things under seizure
 324  Every one who is a bailee of anything that is under lawful seizure by a peace officer or public officer in the execution of the duties of his office, and who is obliged by law or agreement to produce and deliver it to that officer or to another person entitled thereto at a certain time and place, or on demand, steals it if he does not produce and deliver it in accordance with his obligation, but he does not steal it if his failure to produce and deliver it is not the result of a wilful act or omission by him.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 285

 Marginal note: Agent pledging goods, when not theft
 325  A factor or an agent does not commit theft by pledging or giving a lien on goods or documents of title to goods that are entrusted to him for the purpose of sale or for any other purpose, if the pledge or lien is for an amount that does not exceed the sum of
 (a)  the amount due to him from his principal at the time the goods or documents are pledged or the lien is given; and

 (b)  the amount of any bill of exchange that he has accepted for or on account of his principal.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 286

 Marginal note: Theft of telecommunication service
 326   (1)  Every one commits theft who fraudulently, maliciously, or without colour of right,
 (a)  abstracts, consumes or uses electricity or gas or causes it to be wasted or diverted; or

 (b)  uses any telecommunication facility or obtains any telecommunication service.

 Definition of telecommunication
 (2)  In this section and section 327, telecommunication means any transmission, emission or reception of signs, signals, writing, images or sounds or intelligence of any nature by wire, radio, visual or other electromagnetic system.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 287
 1974-75-76, c. 93, s. 23

 Marginal note: Possession of device to obtain telecommunication facility or service
 327   (1)  Every one who, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him, manufactures, possesses, sells or offers for sale or distributes any instrument or device or any component thereof, the design of which renders it primarily useful for obtaining the use of any telecommunication facility or service, under circumstances that give rise to a reasonable inference that the device has been used or is or was intended to be used to obtain the use of any telecommunication facility or service without payment of a lawful charge therefor, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Forfeiture
 (2)  Where a person is convicted of an offence under subsection (1) or paragraph 326(1)(b), any instrument or device in relation to which the offence was committed or the possession of which constituted the offence, on such conviction, in addition to any punishment that is imposed, may be ordered forfeited to Her Majesty, whereupon it may be disposed of as the Attorney General directs.

 Marginal note: Limitation
 (3)  No order for forfeiture shall be made under subsection (2) in respect of telephone, telegraph or other communication facilities or equipment owned by a person engaged in providing telephone, telegraph or other communication service to the public or forming part of the telephone, telegraph or other communication service or system of such a person by means of which an offence under subsection (1) has been committed if such person was not a party to the offence.

 1974-75-76, c. 93, s. 24

 Marginal note: Theft by or from person having special property or interest
 328  A person may be convicted of theft notwithstanding that anything that is alleged to have been stolen was stolen
 (a)  by the owner of it from a person who has a special property or interest in it;

 (b)  by a person who has a special property or interest in it from the owner of it;

 (c)  by a lessee of it from his reversioner;

 (d)  by one of several joint owners, tenants in common or partners of or in it from the other persons who have an interest in it; or

 (e)  by the representatives of an organization from the organization.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 328
 2003, c. 21, s. 4

 329   [Repealed, 2000, c. 12, s. 94]
 Marginal note: Theft by person required to account
 330   (1)  Every one commits theft who, having received anything from any person on terms that require him to account for or pay it or the proceeds of it or a part of the proceeds to that person or another person, fraudulently fails to account for or pay it or the proceeds of it or the part of the proceeds of it accordingly.

 Marginal note: Effect of entry in account
 (2)  Where subsection (1) otherwise applies, but one of the terms is that the thing received or the proceeds or part of the proceeds of it shall be an item in a debtor and creditor account between the person who receives the thing and the person to whom he is to account for or to pay it, and that the latter shall rely only on the liability of the other as his debtor in respect thereof, a proper entry in that account of the thing received or the proceeds or part of the proceeds of it, as the case may be, is a sufficient accounting therefor, and no fraudulent conversion of the thing or the proceeds or part of the proceeds of it thereby accounted for shall be deemed to have taken place.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 290

 Marginal note: Theft by person holding power of attorney
 331  Every one commits theft who, being entrusted, whether solely or jointly with another person, with a power of attorney for the sale, mortgage, pledge or other disposition of real or personal property, fraudulently sells, mortgages, pledges or otherwise disposes of the property or any part of it, or fraudulently converts the proceeds of a sale, mortgage, pledge or other disposition of the property, or any part of the proceeds, to a purpose other than that for which he was entrusted by the power of attorney.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 291

 Marginal note: Misappropriation of money held under direction
 332   (1)  Every one commits theft who, having received, either solely or jointly with another person, money or valuable security or a power of attorney for the sale of real or personal property, with a direction that the money or a part of it, or the proceeds or a part of the proceeds of the security or the property shall be applied to a purpose or paid to a person specified in the direction, fraudulently and contrary to the direction applies to any other purpose or pays to any other person the money or proceeds or any part of it.

 Marginal note: Effect of entry in account
 (2)  This section does not apply where a person who receives anything mentioned in subsection (1) and the person from whom he receives it deal with each other on such terms that all money paid to the former would, in the absence of any such direction, be properly treated as an item in a debtor and creditor account between them, unless the direction is in writing.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 292

 Marginal note: Taking ore for scientific purpose
 333  No person commits theft by reason only that he takes, for the purpose of exploration or scientific investigation, a specimen of ore or mineral from land that is not enclosed and is not occupied or worked as a mine, quarry or digging.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 293

 Marginal note: Punishment for theft
 334  Except where otherwise provided by law, every one who commits theft
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, where the property stolen is a testamentary instrument or the value of what is stolen exceeds five thousand dollars; or

 (b)  is guilty
 (i)  of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or

 (ii)  of an offence punishable on summary conviction,

 where the value of what is stolen does not exceed five thousand dollars.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 334
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 43
 1994, c. 44, s. 20

 Offences Resembling Theft
 Marginal note: Taking motor vehicle or vessel or found therein without consent
 335   (1)  Subject to subsection (1.1), every one who, without the consent of the owner, takes a motor vehicle or vessel with intent to drive, use, navigate or operate it or cause it to be driven, used, navigated or operated, or is an occupant of a motor vehicle or vessel knowing that it was taken without the consent of the owner, is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (1.1)  Subsection (1) does not apply to an occupant of a motor vehicle or vessel who, on becoming aware that it was taken without the consent of the owner, attempted to leave the motor vehicle or vessel, to the extent that it was feasible to do so, or actually left the motor vehicle or vessel.

 Definition of vessel
 (2)  For the purposes of subsection (1), vessel has the meaning assigned by section 214.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 335
 R.S., 1985, c. 1 (4th Supp.), s. 15
 1997, c. 18, s. 15

 Marginal note: Criminal breach of trust
 336  Every one who, being a trustee of anything for the use or benefit, whether in whole or in part, of another person, or for a public or charitable purpose, converts, with intent to defraud and in contravention of his trust, that thing or any part of it to a use that is not authorized by the trust is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 296

 Marginal note: Public servant refusing to deliver property
 337  Every one who, being or having been employed in the service of Her Majesty in right of Canada or a province, or in the service of a municipality, and entrusted by virtue of that employment with the receipt, custody, management or control of anything, refuses or fails to deliver it to a person who is authorized to demand it and does demand it is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 297

 Marginal note: Fraudulently taking cattle or defacing brand
 338   (1)  Every one who, without the consent of the owner,
 (a)  fraudulently takes, holds, keeps in his possession, conceals, receives, appropriates, purchases or sells cattle that are found astray, or

 (b)  fraudulently, in whole or in part,
 (i)  obliterates, alters or defaces a brand or mark on cattle, or

 (ii)  makes a false or counterfeit brand or mark on cattle,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Punishment for theft of cattle
 (2)  Every one who commits theft of cattle is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Evidence of property in cattle
 (3)  In any proceedings under this Act, evidence that cattle are marked with a brand or mark that is recorded or registered in accordance with any Act is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that the cattle are owned by the registered owner of that brand or mark.

 Marginal note: Presumption from possession
 (4)  Where an accused is charged with an offence under subsection (1) or (2), the burden of proving that the cattle came lawfully into the possession of the accused or his employee or into the possession of another person on behalf of the accused is on the accused, if the accused is not the registered owner of the brand or mark with which the cattle are marked, unless it appears that possession of the cattle by an employee of the accused or by another person on behalf of the accused was without the knowledge and authority, sanction or approval of the accused.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 298
 1974-75-76, c. 93, s. 26

 Marginal note: Taking possession, etc., of drift timber
 339   (1)  Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years who, without the consent of the owner,
 (a)  fraudulently takes, holds, keeps in his possession, conceals, receives, appropriates, purchases or sells,

 (b)  removes, alters, obliterates or defaces a mark or number on, or

 (c)  refuses to deliver up to the owner or to the person in charge thereof on behalf of the owner or to a person authorized by the owner to receive it,

 any lumber or lumbering equipment that is found adrift, cast ashore or lying on or embedded in the bed or bottom, or on the bank or beach, of a river, stream or lake in Canada, or in the harbours or any of the coastal waters of Canada.

 Marginal note: Dealer in second-hand goods
 (2)  Every one who, being a dealer in second-hand goods of any kind, trades or traffics in or has in his possession for sale or traffic any lumbering equipment that is marked with the mark, brand, registered timber mark, name or initials of a person, without the written consent of that person, is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Search for timber unlawfully detained
 (3)  A peace officer who suspects, on reasonable grounds, that any lumber owned by any person and bearing the registered timber mark of that person is kept or detained in or on any place without the knowledge or consent of that person, may enter into or on that place to ascertain whether or not it is detained there without the knowledge or consent of that person.

 Marginal note: Evidence of property in timber
 (4)  Where any lumber or lumbering equipment is marked with a timber mark or a boom chain brand registered under any Act, the mark or brand is, in proceedings under subsection (1), and, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that it is the property of the registered owner of the mark or brand.

 Marginal note: Presumption from possession
 (5)  Where an accused or his servants or agents are in possession of lumber or lumbering equipment marked with the mark, brand, registered timber mark, name or initials of another person, the burden of proving that it came lawfully into his possession or into possession of his servants or agents is, in proceedings under subsection (1), on the accused.

 Marginal note: Definitions
 (6)  In this section,
 coastal waters of Canada coastal waters of Canada  includes all of Queen Charlotte Sound, all the Strait of Georgia and the Canadian waters of the Strait of Juan de Fuca; ( eaux côtières du Canada )
 lumber lumber  means timber, mast, spar, shingle bolt, sawlog or lumber of any description; ( bois )
 lumbering equipment lumbering equipment  includes a boom chain, chain, line and shackle. ( matériel d’exploitation forestière )

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 299

 Marginal note: Destroying documents of title
 340  Every one who, for a fraudulent purpose, destroys, cancels, conceals or obliterates
 (a)  a document of title to goods or lands,

 (b)  a valuable security or testamentary instrument, or

 (c)  a judicial or official document,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 300

 Marginal note: Fraudulent concealment
 341  Every one who, for a fraudulent purpose, takes, obtains, removes or conceals anything is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 301

 Marginal note: Theft, forgery, etc., of credit card
 342   (1)  Every person who
 (a)  steals a credit card,

 (b)  forges or falsifies a credit card,

 (c)  possesses, uses or traffics in a credit card or a forged or falsified credit card, knowing that it was obtained, made or altered
 (i)  by the commission in Canada of an offence, or

 (ii)  by an act or omission anywhere that, if it had occurred in Canada, would have constituted an offence, or

 (d)  uses a credit card knowing that it has been revoked or cancelled,

 is guilty of
 (e)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, or

 (f)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Jurisdiction
 (2)  An accused who is charged with an offence under subsection (1) may be tried and punished by any court having jurisdiction to try that offence in the place where the offence is alleged to have been committed or in the place where the accused is found, is arrested or is in custody, but where the place where the accused is found, is arrested or is in custody is outside the province in which the offence is alleged to have been committed, no proceedings in respect of that offence shall be commenced in that place without the consent of the Attorney General of that province.

 Marginal note: Unauthorized use of credit card data
 (3)  Every person who, fraudulently and without colour of right, possesses, uses, traffics in or permits another person to use credit card data, whether or not authentic, that would enable a person to use a credit card or to obtain the services that are provided by the issuer of a credit card to credit card holders is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Definition of “traffic”
 (4)  In this section, traffic means, in relation to a credit card or credit card data, to sell, export from or import into Canada, distribute or deal with in any other way.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 342
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), ss. 44, 185(F)
 1997, c. 18, s. 16

 Marginal note: Making, having or dealing in instruments for forging or falsifying credit cards
 342.01   (1)  Every person who, without lawful justification or excuse,
 (a)  makes or repairs,

 (b)  buys or sells,

 (c)  exports from or imports into Canada, or

 (d)  possesses

 any instrument, device, apparatus, material or thing that the person knows has been used or knows is adapted or intended for use in forging or falsifying credit cards is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, or is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Forfeiture
 (2)  Where a person is convicted of an offence under subsection (1), any instrument, device, apparatus, material or thing in relation to which the offence was committed or the possession of which constituted the offence may, in addition to any other punishment that may be imposed, be ordered forfeited to Her Majesty, whereupon it may be disposed of as the Attorney General directs.

 Marginal note: Limitation
 (3)  No order of forfeiture may be made under subsection (2) in respect of any thing that is the property of a person who was not a party to the offence under subsection (1).

 1997, c. 18, s. 17

 Marginal note: Unauthorized use of computer
 342.1   (1)  Every one who, fraudulently and without colour of right,
 (a)  obtains, directly or indirectly, any computer service,

 (b)  by means of an electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device, intercepts or causes to be intercepted, directly or indirectly, any function of a computer system,

 (c)  uses or causes to be used, directly or indirectly, a computer system with intent to commit an offence under paragraph (a) or (b) or an offence under section 430 in relation to data or a computer system, or

 (d)  uses, possesses, traffics in or permits another person to have access to a computer password that would enable a person to commit an offence under paragraph (a), (b) or (c)

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, or is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Definitions
 (2)  In this section,
 computer password
 mot de passe
 computer password means any data by which a computer service or computer system is capable of being obtained or used; ( mot de passe )
 computer program
 programme d’ordinateur
 computer program means data representing instructions or statements that, when executed in a computer system, causes the computer system to perform a function; ( programme d’ordinateur )
 computer service
 service d’ordinateur
 computer service includes data processing and the storage or retrieval of data; ( service d’ordinateur )
 computer system
 ordinateur
 computer system means a device that, or a group of interconnected or related devices one or more of which,
 (a)  contains computer programs or other data, and

 (b)  pursuant to computer programs,
 (i)  performs logic and control, and

 (ii)  may perform any other function; ( ordinateur )

 data
 données
 data means representations of information or of concepts that are being prepared or have been prepared in a form suitable for use in a computer system; ( données )
 electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device
 dispositif électromagnétique, acoustique, mécanique ou autre
 electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device means any device or apparatus that is used or is capable of being used to intercept any function of a computer system, but does not include a hearing aid used to correct subnormal hearing of the user to not better than normal hearing; ( dispositif électromagnétique, acoustique, mécanique ou autre )
 function
 fonction
 function includes logic, control, arithmetic, deletion, storage and retrieval and communication or telecommunication to, from or within a computer system; ( fonction )
 intercept
 intercepter
 intercept includes listen to or record a function of a computer system, or acquire the substance, meaning or purport thereof; ( intercepter )
 traffic
 trafic
 traffic means, in respect of a computer password, to sell, export from or import into Canada, distribute or deal with in any other way. ( trafic )

 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 45
 1997, c. 18, s. 18

 Marginal note: Possession of device to obtain computer service
 342.2   (1)  Every person who, without lawful justification or excuse, makes, possesses, sells, offers for sale or distributes any instrument or device or any component thereof, the design of which renders it primarily useful for committing an offence under section 342.1, under circumstances that give rise to a reasonable inference that the instrument, device or component has been used or is or was intended to be used to commit an offence contrary to that section,
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Forfeiture
 (2)  Where a person is convicted of an offence under subsection (1), any instrument or device, in relation to which the offence was committed or the possession of which constituted the offence, may, in addition to any other punishment that may be imposed, be ordered forfeited to Her Majesty, whereupon it may be disposed of as the Attorney General directs.

 Marginal note: Limitation
 (3)  No order of forfeiture may be made under subsection (2) in respect of any thing that is the property of a person who was not a party to the offence under subsection (1).

 1997, c. 18, s. 19

 Robbery and Extortion
 Marginal note: Robbery
 343  Every one commits robbery who
 (a)  steals, and for the purpose of extorting whatever is stolen or to prevent or overcome resistance to the stealing, uses violence or threats of violence to a person or property;

 (b)  steals from any person and, at the time he steals or immediately before or immediately thereafter, wounds, beats, strikes or uses any personal violence to that person;

 (c)  assaults any person with intent to steal from him; or

 (d)  steals from any person while armed with an offensive weapon or imitation thereof.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 302

 Marginal note: Robbery
 344  Every person who commits robbery is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  where a firearm is used in the commission of the offence, to imprisonment for life and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years; and

 (b)  in any other case, to imprisonment for life.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 344
 1995, c. 39, s. 149

 Marginal note: Stopping mail with intent
 345  Every one who stops a mail conveyance with intent to rob or search it is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 304

 Marginal note: Extortion
 346   (1)  Every one commits extortion who, without reasonable justification or excuse and with intent to obtain anything, by threats, accusations, menaces or violence induces or attempts to induce any person, whether or not he is the person threatened, accused or menaced or to whom violence is shown, to do anything or cause anything to be done.

 Marginal note: Extortion
 (1.1)  Every person who commits extortion is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (a)  where a firearm is used in the commission of the offence, to imprisonment for life and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years; and

 (b)  in any other case, to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Saving
 (2)  A threat to institute civil proceedings is not a threat for the purposes of this section.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 346
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 46
 1995, c. 39, s. 150

 Criminal Interest Rate
 Marginal note: Criminal interest rate
 347   (1)  Despite any other Act of Parliament, every one who enters into an agreement or arrangement to receive interest at a criminal rate, or receives a payment or partial payment of interest at a criminal rate, is
 (a)  guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to a fine not exceeding $25,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to both.

 Marginal note: Definitions
 (2)  In this section,
 credit advanced credit advanced  means the aggregate of the money and the monetary value of any goods, services or benefits actually advanced or to be advanced under an agreement or arrangement minus the aggregate of any required deposit balance and any fee, fine, penalty, commission and other similar charge or expense directly or indirectly incurred under the original or any collateral agreement or arrangement; ( capital prêté )
 criminal rate criminal rate  means an effective annual rate of interest calculated in accordance with generally accepted actuarial practices and principles that exceeds sixty per cent on the credit advanced under an agreement or arrangement; ( taux criminel )
 insurance charge insurance charge  means the cost of insuring the risk assumed by the person who advances or is to advance credit under an agreement or arrangement, where the face amount of the insurance does not exceed the credit advanced; ( frais d’assurance )
 interest interest  means the aggregate of all charges and expenses, whether in the form of a fee, fine, penalty, commission or other similar charge or expense or in any other form, paid or payable for the advancing of credit under an agreement or arrangement, by or on behalf of the person to whom the credit is or is to be advanced, irrespective of the person to whom any such charges and expenses are or are to be paid or payable, but does not include any repayment of credit advanced or any insurance charge, official fee, overdraft charge, required deposit balance or, in the case of a mortgage transaction, any amount required to be paid on account of property taxes; ( intérêt )
 official fee official fee  means a fee required by law to be paid to any governmental authority in connection with perfecting any security under an agreement or arrangement for the advancing of credit; ( taxe officielle )
 overdraft charge overdraft charge  means a charge not exceeding five dollars for the creation of or increase in an overdraft, imposed by a credit union or caisse populaire the membership of which is wholly or substantially comprised of natural persons or a deposit taking institution the deposits in which are insured, in whole or in part, by the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation or guaranteed, in whole or in part, by the Quebec Deposit Insurance Board; ( frais pour découvert de compte )
 required deposit balance required deposit balance  means a fixed or an ascertainable amount of the money actually advanced or to be advanced under an agreement or arrangement that is required, as a condition of the agreement or arrangement, to be deposited or invested by or on behalf of the person to whom the advance is or is to be made and that may be available, in the event of his defaulting in any payment, to or for the benefit of the person who advances or is to advance the money. ( dépôt de garantie )

 Marginal note: Presumption
 (3)  Where a person receives a payment or partial payment of interest at a criminal rate, he shall, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, be deemed to have knowledge of the nature of the payment and that it was received at a criminal rate.

 Marginal note: Proof of effective annual rate
 (4)  In any proceedings under this section, a certificate of a Fellow of the Canadian Institute of Actuaries stating that he has calculated the effective annual rate of interest on any credit advanced under an agreement or arrangement and setting out the calculations and the information on which they are based is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof of the effective annual rate without proof of the signature or official character of the person appearing to have signed the certificate.

 Marginal note: Notice
 (5)  A certificate referred to in subsection (4) shall not be received in evidence unless the party intending to produce it has given to the accused or defendant reasonable notice of that intention together with a copy of the certificate.

 Marginal note: Cross-examination with leave
 (6)  An accused or a defendant against whom a certificate referred to in subsection (4) is produced may, with leave of the court, require the attendance of the actuary for the purposes of cross-examination.

 Marginal note: Consent required for proceedings
 (7)  No proceedings shall be commenced under this section without the consent of the Attorney General.

 Marginal note: Application
 (8)  This section does not apply to any transaction to which the Tax Rebate Discounting Act applies.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 347
 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F)
 2007, c. 9, s. 1

 Marginal note: Definitions
 347.1   (1)  The following definitions apply in subsection (2).
 interest interest  has the same meaning as in subsection 347(2). ( intérêts )
 payday loan payday loan  means an advancement of money in exchange for a post-dated cheque, a pre-authorized debit or a future payment of a similar nature but not for any guarantee, suretyship, overdraft protection or security on property and not through a margin loan, pawnbroking, a line of credit or a credit card. ( prêt sur salaire )

 Marginal note: Non-application
 (2)  Section 347 and section 2 of the Interest Act do not apply to a person, other than a financial institution within the meaning of paragraphs (a) to (d) of the definition financial institution in section 2 of the Bank Act , in respect of a payday loan agreement entered into by the person to receive interest, or in respect of interest received by that person under the agreement, if
 (a)  the amount of money advanced under the agreement is $1,500 or less and the term of the agreement is 62 days or less;

 (b)  the person is licensed or otherwise specifically authorized under the laws of a province to enter into the agreement; and

 (c)  the province is designated under subsection (3).

 Marginal note: Designation of province
 (3)  The Governor in Council shall, by order and at the request of the lieutenant governor in council of a province, designate the province for the purposes of this section if the province has legislative measures that protect recipients of payday loans and that provide for limits on the total cost of borrowing under the agreements.

 Marginal note: Revocation
 (4)  The Governor in Council shall, by order, revoke the designation made under subsection (3) if requested to do so by the lieutenant governor in council of the province or if the legislative measures described in that subsection are no longer in force in that province.

 2007, c. 9, s. 2

 Breaking and Entering
 Marginal note: Breaking and entering with intent, committing offence or breaking out
 348   (1)  Every one who
 (a)  breaks and enters a place with intent to commit an indictable offence therein,

 (b)  breaks and enters a place and commits an indictable offence therein, or

 (c)  breaks out of a place after
 (i)  committing an indictable offence therein, or

 (ii)  entering the place with intent to commit an indictable offence therein,

 is guilty
 (d)  if the offence is committed in relation to a dwelling-house, of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life, and

 (e)  if the offence is committed in relation to a place other than a dwelling-house, of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Presumptions
 (2)  For the purposes of proceedings under this section, evidence that an accused
 (a)  broke and entered a place or attempted to break and enter a place is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof that he broke and entered the place or attempted to do so, as the case may be, with intent to commit an indictable offence therein; or

 (b)  broke out of a place is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that he broke out after
 (i)  committing an indictable offence therein, or

 (ii)  entering with intent to commit an indictable offence therein.

 Marginal note: Definition of place
 (3)  For the purposes of this section and section 351, place means
 (a)  a dwelling-house;

 (b)  a building or structure or any part thereof, other than a dwelling-house;

 (c)  a railway vehicle, a vessel, an aircraft or a trailer; or

 (d)  a pen or an enclosure in which fur-bearing animals are kept in captivity for breeding or commercial purposes.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 348
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 47
 1997, c. 18, s. 20

 Marginal note: Aggravating circumstance — home invasion
 348.1  If a person is convicted of an offence under any of subsection 279(2) or sections 343, 346 and 348 in relation to a dwelling-house, the court imposing the sentence on the person shall consider as an aggravating circumstance the fact that the dwelling-house was occupied at the time of the commission of the offence and that the person, in committing the offence,
 (a)  knew that or was reckless as to whether the dwelling-house was occupied; and

 (b)  used violence or threats of violence to a person or property.

 2002, c. 13, s. 15

 Marginal note: Being unlawfully in dwelling-house
 349   (1)  Every person who, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on that person, enters or is in a dwelling-house with intent to commit an indictable offence in it is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Presumption
 (2)  For the purposes of proceedings under this section, evidence that an accused, without lawful excuse, entered or was in a dwelling-house is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that he entered or was in the dwelling-house with intent to commit an indictable offence therein.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 349
 1997, c. 18, s. 21

 Marginal note: Entrance
 350  For the purposes of sections 348 and 349,
 (a)  a person enters as soon as any part of his body or any part of an instrument that he uses is within any thing that is being entered; and

 (b)  a person shall be deemed to have broken and entered if
 (i)  he obtained entrance by a threat or an artifice or by collusion with a person within, or

 (ii)  he entered without lawful justification or excuse, the proof of which lies on him, by a permanent or temporary opening.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 308

 Marginal note: Possession of break-in instrument
 351   (1)  Every one who, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him, has in his possession any instrument suitable for the purpose of breaking into any place, motor vehicle, vault or safe under circumstances that give rise to a reasonable inference that the instrument has been used or is or was intended to be used for any such purpose, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Disguise with intent
 (2)  Every one who, with intent to commit an indictable offence, has his face masked or coloured or is otherwise disguised is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 351
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 48

 Marginal note: Possession of instruments for breaking into coin-operated or currency exchange devices
 352  Every one who, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him, has in his possession any instrument suitable for breaking into a coin-operated device or a currency exchange device, under circumstances that give rise to a reasonable inference that the instrument has been used or is or was intended to be used for breaking into a coin-operated device or a currency exchange device, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 310
 1972, c. 13, s. 26
 1974-75-76, c. 93, s. 28

 Marginal note: Selling, etc., automobile master key
 353   (1)  Every one who
 (a)  sells, offers for sale or advertises in a province an automobile master key otherwise than under the authority of a licence issued by the Attorney General of that province, or

 (b)  purchases or has in his possession in a province an automobile master key otherwise than under the authority of a licence issued by the Attorney General of that province,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (1.1)  A police officer specially authorized by the chief of the police force to possess an automobile master key is not guilty of an offence under subsection (1) by reason only that the police officer possesses an automobile master key for the purposes of the execution of the police officer’s duties.

 Marginal note: Terms and conditions of licence
 (2)  A licence issued by the Attorney General of a province as described in paragraph (1)(a) or (b) may contain such terms and conditions relating to the sale, offering for sale, advertising, purchasing, having in possession or use of an automobile master key as the Attorney General of that province may prescribe.

 Marginal note: Fees
 (2.1)  The Attorney General of a province may prescribe fees for the issue or renewal of licences as described in paragraph (1)(a) or (b).

 Marginal note: Record to be kept
 (3)  Every one who sells an automobile master key
 (a)  shall keep a record of the transaction showing the name and address of the purchaser and particulars of the licence issued to the purchaser as described in paragraph (1)(b); and

 (b)  shall produce the record for inspection at the request of a peace officer.

 Marginal note: Failure to comply with subsection (3)
 (4)  Every one who fails to comply with subsection (3) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Definitions
 (5)  The definitions in this subsection apply in this section.
 automobile master key automobile master key  includes a key, pick, rocker key or other instrument designed or adapted to operate the ignition or other switches or locks of a series of motor vehicles. ( passe-partout d’automobile )
 licence licence  includes any authorization. ( licence )

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 353
 1997, c. 18, s. 22

 Having in Possession
 Marginal note: Possession of property obtained by crime
 354   (1)  Every one commits an offence who has in his possession any property or thing or any proceeds of any property or thing knowing that all or part of the property or thing or of the proceeds was obtained by or derived directly or indirectly from
 (a)  the commission in Canada of an offence punishable by indictment; or

 (b)  an act or omission anywhere that, if it had occurred in Canada, would have constituted an offence punishable by indictment.

 Marginal note: Obliterated vehicle identification number
 (2)  In proceedings in respect of an offence under subsection (1), evidence that a person has in his possession a motor vehicle the vehicle identification number of which has been wholly or partially removed or obliterated or a part of a motor vehicle being a part bearing a vehicle identification number that has been wholly or partially removed or obliterated is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that the motor vehicle or part, as the case may be, was obtained, and that such person had the motor vehicle or part, as the case may be, in his possession knowing that it was obtained,
 (a)  by the commission in Canada of an offence punishable by indictment; or

 (b)  by an act or omission anywhere that, if it had occurred in Canada, would have constituted an offence punishable by indictment.

 Definition of vehicle identification number
 (3)  For the purposes of subsection (2), vehicle identification number means any number or other mark placed on a motor vehicle for the purpose of distinguishing the motor vehicle from other similar motor vehicles.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (4)  A peace officer or a person acting under the direction of a peace officer is not guilty of an offence under this section by reason only that the peace officer or person possesses property or a thing or the proceeds of property or a thing mentioned in subsection (1) for the purposes of an investigation or otherwise in the execution of the peace officer’s duties.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 354
 1997, c. 18, s. 23

 Marginal note: Punishment
 355  Every one who commits an offence under section 354
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, where the subject-matter of the offence is a testamentary instrument or the value of the subject-matter of the offence exceeds five thousand dollars; or

 (b)  is guilty
 (i)  of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or

 (ii)  of an offence punishable on summary conviction,

 where the value of the subject-matter of the offence does not exceed five thousand dollars.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 355
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 49
 1994, c. 44, s. 21

 Marginal note: Theft from mail
 356   (1)  Every one who
 (a)  steals
 (i)  any thing sent by post, after it is deposited at a post office and before it is delivered,

 (ii)  a bag, sack or other container or covering in which mail is conveyed, whether or not it contains mail, or

 (iii)  a key suited to a lock adopted for use in the Canada Post Corporation, or

 (b)  has in his possession anything in respect of which he knows that an offence has been committed under paragraph (a),

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Allegation of value not necessary
 (2)  In proceedings for an offence under this section it is not necessary to allege in the indictment or to prove on the trial that anything in respect of which the offence was committed had any value.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 314
 1980-81-82-83, c. 54, s. 56

 Marginal note: Bringing into Canada property obtained by crime
 357  Every one who brings into or has in Canada anything that he has obtained outside Canada by an act that, if it had been committed in Canada, would have been the offence of theft or an offence under section 342 or 354 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding ten years.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 357
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 50

 Marginal note: Having in possession when complete
 358  For the purposes of sections 342 and 354 and paragraph 356(1)(b), the offence of having in possession is complete when a person has, alone or jointly with another person, possession of or control over anything mentioned in those sections or when he aids in concealing or disposing of it, as the case may be.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 358
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 50

 Marginal note: Evidence
 359   (1)  Where an accused is charged with an offence under section 342 or 354 or paragraph 356(1)(b), evidence is admissible at any stage of the proceedings to show that property other than the property that is the subject-matter of the proceedings
 (a)  was found in the possession of the accused, and

 (b)  was stolen within twelve months before the proceedings were commenced,

 and that evidence may be considered for the purpose of proving that the accused knew that the property that forms the subject-matter of the proceedings was stolen property.

 Marginal note: Notice to accused
 (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply unless
 (a)  at least three days notice in writing is given to the accused that in the proceedings it is intended to prove that property other than the property that is the subject-matter of the proceedings was found in his possession; and

 (b)  the notice sets out the nature or description of the property and describes the person from whom it is alleged to have been stolen.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 359
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 51

 Marginal note: Evidence of previous conviction
 360   (1)  Where an accused is charged with an offence under section 354 or paragraph 356(1)(b) and evidence is adduced that the subject-matter of the proceedings was found in his possession, evidence that the accused was, within five years before the proceedings were commenced, convicted of an offence involving theft or an offence under section 354 is admissible at any stage of the proceedings and may be taken into consideration for the purpose of proving that the accused knew that the property that forms the subject-matter of the proceedings was unlawfully obtained.

 Marginal note: Notice to accused
 (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply unless at least three days notice in writing is given to the accused that in the proceedings it is intended to prove the previous conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 318

 False Pretences
 Marginal note: False pretence
 361   (1)  A false pretence is a representation of a matter of fact either present or past, made by words or otherwise, that is known by the person who makes it to be false and that is made with a fraudulent intent to induce the person to whom it is made to act on it.

 Marginal note: Exaggeration
 (2)  Exaggerated commendation or depreciation of the quality of anything is not a false pretence unless it is carried to such an extent that it amounts to a fraudulent misrepresentation of fact.

 Marginal note: Question of fact
 (3)  For the purposes of subsection (2), it is a question of fact whether commendation or depreciation amounts to a fraudulent misrepresentation of fact.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 319

 Marginal note: False pretence or false statement
 362   (1)  Every one commits an offence who
 (a)  by a false pretence, whether directly or through the medium of a contract obtained by a false pretence, obtains anything in respect of which the offence of theft may be committed or causes it to be delivered to another person;

 (b)  obtains credit by a false pretence or by fraud;

 (c)  knowingly makes or causes to be made, directly or indirectly, a false statement in writing with intent that it should be relied on, with respect to the financial condition or means or ability to pay of himself or herself or any person or organization that he or she is interested in or that he or she acts for, for the purpose of procuring, in any form whatever, whether for his or her benefit or the benefit of that person or organization,
 (i)  the delivery of personal property,

 (ii)  the payment of money,

 (iii)  the making of a loan,

 (iv)  the grant or extension of credit,

 (v)  the discount of an account receivable, or

 (vi)  the making, accepting, discounting or endorsing of a bill of exchange, cheque, draft or promissory note; or

 (d)  knowing that a false statement in writing has been made with respect to the financial condition or means or ability to pay of himself or herself or another person or organization that he or she is interested in or that he or she acts for, procures on the faith of that statement, whether for his or her benefit or for the benefit of that person or organization, anything mentioned in subparagraphs (c)(i) to (vi).

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits an offence under paragraph (1)(a)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding ten years, where the property obtained is a testamentary instrument or the value of what is obtained exceeds five thousand dollars; or

 (b)  is guilty
 (i)  of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or

 (ii)  of an offence punishable on summary conviction,

 where the value of what is obtained does not exceed five thousand dollars.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (3)  Every one who commits an offence under paragraph (1)(b), (c) or (d) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Presumption from cheque issued without funds
 (4)  Where, in proceedings under paragraph (1)(a), it is shown that anything was obtained by the accused by means of a cheque that, when presented for payment within a reasonable time, was dishonoured on the ground that no funds or insufficient funds were on deposit to the credit of the accused in the bank or other institution on which the cheque was drawn, it shall be presumed to have been obtained by a false pretence, unless the court is satisfied by evidence that when the accused issued the cheque he believed on reasonable grounds that it would be honoured if presented for payment within a reasonable time after it was issued.

 Definition of cheque
 (5)  In this section, cheque includes, in addition to its ordinary meaning, a bill of exchange drawn on any institution that makes it a business practice to honour bills of exchange or any particular kind thereof drawn on it by depositors.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 362
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 52
 1994, c. 44, s. 22
 2003, c. 21, s. 5

 Marginal note: Obtaining execution of valuable security by fraud
 363  Every one who, with intent to defraud or injure another person, by a false pretence causes or induces any person
 (a)  to execute, make, accept, endorse or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or

 (b)  to write, impress or affix a name or seal on any paper or parchment in order that it may afterwards be made or converted into or used or dealt with as a valuable security,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 321

 Marginal note: Fraudulently obtaining food, beverage or accommodation
 364   (1)  Every one who fraudulently obtains food, a beverage or accommodation at any place that is in the business of providing those things is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Presumption
 (2)  In proceedings under this section, evidence that the accused obtained food, a beverage or accommodation at a place that is in the business of providing those things and did not pay for it and
 (a)  made a false or fictitious show or pretence of having baggage,

 (b)  had any false or pretended baggage,

 (c)  surreptitiously removed or attempted to remove his baggage or any material part of it,

 (d)  absconded or surreptitiously left the premises,

 (e)  knowingly made a false statement to obtain credit or time for payment, or

 (f)  offered a worthless cheque, draft or security in payment for the food, beverage or accommodation,

 is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof of fraud.

 Definition of cheque
 (3)  In this section, cheque includes, in addition to its ordinary meaning, a bill of exchange drawn on any institution that makes it a business practice to honour bills of exchange or any particular kind thereof drawn on it by depositors.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 364
 1994, c. 44, s. 23

 Marginal note: Pretending to practise witchcraft, etc.
 365  Every one who fraudulently
 (a)  pretends to exercise or to use any kind of witchcraft, sorcery, enchantment or conjuration,

 (b)  undertakes, for a consideration, to tell fortunes, or

 (c)  pretends from his skill in or knowledge of an occult or crafty science to discover where or in what manner anything that is supposed to have been stolen or lost may be found,

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 323

 Forgery and Offences Resembling Forgery
 Marginal note: Forgery
 366   (1)  Every one commits forgery who makes a false document, knowing it to be false, with intent
 (a)  that it should in any way be used or acted on as genuine, to the prejudice of any one whether within Canada or not; or

 (b)  that a person should be induced, by the belief that it is genuine, to do or to refrain from doing anything, whether within Canada or not.

 Marginal note: Making false document
 (2)  Making a false document includes
 (a)  altering a genuine document in any material part;

 (b)  making a material addition to a genuine document or adding to it a false date, attestation, seal or other thing that is material; or

 (c)  making a material alteration in a genuine document by erasure, obliteration, removal or in any other way.

 Marginal note: When forgery complete
 (3)  Forgery is complete as soon as a document is made with the knowledge and intent referred to in subsection (1), notwithstanding that the person who makes it does not intend that any particular person should use or act on it as genuine or be induced, by the belief that it is genuine, to do or refrain from doing anything.

 Marginal note: Forgery complete though document incomplete
 (4)  Forgery is complete notwithstanding that the false document is incomplete or does not purport to be a document that is binding in law, if it is such as to indicate that it was intended to be acted on as genuine.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 324

 Marginal note: Punishment for forgery
 367  Every one who commits forgery
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 367
 1994, c. 44, s. 24
 1997, c. 18, s. 24

 Marginal note: Uttering forged document
 368   (1)  Every one who, knowing that a document is forged,
 (a)  uses, deals with or acts on it, or

 (b)  causes or attempts to cause any person to use, deal with or act on it,

 as if the document were genuine,
 (c)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (d)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Wherever forged
 (2)  For the purposes of proceedings under this section, the place where a document was forged is not material.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 368
 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F)
 1997, c. 18, s. 25

 Marginal note: Exchequer bill paper, public seals, etc.
 369  Every one who, without lawful authority or excuse, the proof of which lies on him,
 (a)  makes, uses or knowingly has in his possession
 (i)  any exchequer bill paper, revenue paper or paper that is used to make bank-notes, or

 (ii)  any paper that is intended to resemble paper mentioned in subparagraph (i),

 (b)  makes, offers or disposes of or knowingly has in his possession any plate, die, machinery, instrument or other writing or material that is adapted and intended to be used to commit forgery, or

 (c)  makes, reproduces or uses a public seal of Canada or of a province, or the seal of a public body or authority in Canada, or of a court of law,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 327

 Marginal note: Counterfeit proclamation, etc.
 370  Every one who knowingly
 (a)  prints any proclamation, order, regulation or appointment, or notice thereof, and causes it falsely to purport to have been printed by the Queen’s Printer for Canada or the Queen’s Printer for a province, or

 (b)  tenders in evidence a copy of any proclamation, order, regulation or appointment that falsely purports to have been printed by the Queen’s Printer for Canada or the Queen’s Printer for a province,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 328

 Marginal note: Telegram, etc., in false name
 371  Every one who, with intent to defraud, causes or procures a telegram, cablegram or radio message to be sent or delivered as being sent by the authority of another person, knowing that it is not sent by his authority and with intent that the message should be acted on as being sent by his authority, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 329

 Marginal note: False messages
 372   (1)  Every one who, with intent to injure or alarm any person, conveys or causes or procures to be conveyed by letter, telegram, telephone, cable, radio or otherwise information that he knows is false is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Indecent telephone calls
 (2)  Every one who, with intent to alarm or annoy any person, makes any indecent telephone call to that person is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Harassing telephone calls
 (3)  Every one who, without lawful excuse and with intent to harass any person, makes or causes to be made repeated telephone calls to that person is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 330

 373   [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 53]
 Marginal note: Drawing document without authority, etc.
 374  Every one who
 (a)  with intent to defraud and without lawful authority makes, executes, draws, signs, accepts or endorses a document in the name or on the account of another person by procuration or otherwise, or

 (b)  makes use of or utters a document knowing that it has been made, executed, signed, accepted or endorsed with intent to defraud and without lawful authority, in the name or on the account of another person, by procuration or otherwise,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 332

 Marginal note: Obtaining, etc., by instrument based on forged document
 375  Every one who demands, receives or obtains anything, or causes or procures anything to be delivered or paid to any person under, on or by virtue of any instrument issued under the authority of law, knowing that it is based on a forged document, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 333

 Marginal note: Counterfeiting stamp, etc.
 376   (1)  Every one who
 (a)  fraudulently uses, mutilates, affixes, removes or counterfeits a stamp or part thereof,

 (b)  knowingly and without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him, has in his possession
 (i)  a counterfeit stamp or a stamp that has been fraudulently mutilated, or

 (ii)  anything bearing a stamp of which a part has been fraudulently erased, removed or concealed, or

 (c)  without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him, makes or knowingly has in his possession a die or instrument that is capable of making the impression of a stamp or part thereof,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 Marginal note: Counterfeiting mark
 (2)  Every one who, without lawful authority,
 (a)  makes a mark,

 (b)  sells, or exposes for sale, or has in his possession a counterfeit mark,

 (c)  affixes a mark to anything that is required by law to be marked, branded, sealed or wrapped other than the thing to which the mark was originally affixed or was intended to be affixed, or

 (d)  affixes a counterfeit mark to anything that is required by law to be marked, branded, sealed or wrapped,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 Marginal note: Definitions
 (3)  In this section,
 mark
 marque
 mark means a mark, brand, seal, wrapper or design used by or on behalf of
 (a)  the government of Canada or a province,

 (b)  the government of a state other than Canada, or

 (c)  any department, board, commission or agent established by a government mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) in connection with the service or business of that government; ( marque )

 stamp
 timbre
 stamp means an impressed or adhesive stamp used for the purpose of revenue by the government of Canada or a province or by the government of a state other than Canada. ( timbre )

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 334

 Marginal note: Damaging documents
 377   (1)  Every one who unlawfully
 (a)  destroys, defaces or injures a register, or any part of a register, of births, baptisms, marriages, deaths or burials that is required or authorized by law to be kept in Canada, or a copy or any part of a copy of such a register that is required by law to be transmitted to a registrar or other officer,

 (b)  inserts or causes to be inserted in a register or copy referred to in paragraph (a) an entry, that he knows is false, of any matter relating to a birth, baptism, marriage, death or burial, or erases any material part from that register or copy,

 (c)  destroys, damages or obliterates an election document or causes an election document to be destroyed, damaged or obliterated, or

 (d)  makes or causes to be made an erasure, alteration or interlineation in or on an election document,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Definition of election document
 (2)  In this section, election document means any document or writing issued under the authority of an Act of Parliament or the legislature of a province with respect to an election held pursuant to the authority of that Act.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 335

 Marginal note: Offences in relation to registers
 378  Every one who
 (a)  being authorized or required by law to make or issue a certified copy of, extract from or certificate in respect of a register, record or document, knowingly makes or issues a false certified copy, extract or certificate,

 (b)  not being authorized or required by law to make or issue a certified copy of, extract from or certificate in respect of a register, record or document, fraudulently makes or issues a copy, extract or certificate that purports to be certified as authorized or required by law, or

 (c)  being authorized or required by law to make a certificate or declaration concerning any particular required for the purpose of making entries in a register, record or document, knowingly and falsely makes the certificate or declaration,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 336

 PART X Fraudulent Transactions Relating to Contracts and Trade
 Interpretation
 Marginal note: Definitions
 379  In this Part,
 goods
 marchandises
 goods means anything that is the subject of trade or commerce; ( marchandises )
 trading stamps
 bons-primes
 trading stamps includes any form of cash receipt, receipt, coupon, premium ticket or other device, designed or intended to be given to the purchaser of goods by the vendor thereof or on his behalf, and to represent a discount on the price of the goods or a premium to the purchaser thereof
 (a)  that may be redeemed
 (i)  by any person other than the vendor, the person from whom the vendor purchased the goods or the manufacturer of the goods,

 (ii)  by the vendor, the person from whom the vendor purchased the goods or the manufacturer of the goods in cash or in goods that are not his property in whole or in part, or

 (iii)  by the vendor elsewhere than in the premises where the goods are purchased, or

 (b)  that does not show on its face the place where it is delivered and the merchantable value thereof, or

 (c)  that may not be redeemed on demand at any time,

 but an offer, endorsed by the manufacturer on a wrapper or container in which goods are sold, of a premium or reward for the return of that wrapper or container to the manufacturer is not a trading stamp. ( bons-primes )
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 337

 Fraud
 Marginal note: Fraud
 380   (1)  Every one who, by deceit, falsehood or other fraudulent means, whether or not it is a false pretence within the meaning of this Act, defrauds the public or any person, whether ascertained or not, of any property, money or valuable security or any service,
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding fourteen years, where the subject-matter of the offence is a testamentary instrument or the value of the subject-matter of the offence exceeds five thousand dollars; or

 (b)  is guilty
 (i)  of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or

 (ii)  of an offence punishable on summary conviction,

 where the value of the subject-matter of the offence does not exceed five thousand dollars.

 Marginal note: Affecting public market
 (2)  Every one who, by deceit, falsehood or other fraudulent means, whether or not it is a false pretence within the meaning of this Act, with intent to defraud, affects the public market price of stocks, shares, merchandise or anything that is offered for sale to the public is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 380
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 54
 1994, c. 44, s. 25
 1997, c. 18, s. 26
 2004, c. 3, s. 2

 Marginal note: Sentencing — aggravating circumstances
 380.1   (1)  Without limiting the generality of section 718.2, where a court imposes a sentence for an offence referred to in sections 380, 382, 382.1 and 400, it shall consider the following as aggravating circumstances:
 (a)  the value of the fraud committed exceeded one million dollars;

 (b)  the offence adversely affected, or had the potential to adversely affect, the stability of the Canadian economy or financial system or any financial market in Canada or investor confidence in such a financial market;

 (c)  the offence involved a large number of victims; and

 (d)  in committing the offence, the offender took advantage of the high regard in which the offender was held in the community.

 Marginal note: Non-mitigating factors
 (2)  The court shall not consider as mitigating circumstances the offender’s employment, employment skills or status or reputation in the community if those circumstances were relevant to, contributed to, or were used in the commission of the offence.

 2004, c. 3, s. 3

 Marginal note: Using mails to defraud
 381  Every one who makes use of the mails for the purpose of transmitting or delivering letters or circulars concerning schemes devised or intended to deceive or defraud the public, or for the purpose of obtaining money under false pretences, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 339

 Marginal note: Fraudulent manipulation of stock exchange transactions
 382  Every one who, through the facility of a stock exchange, curb market or other market, with intent to create a false or misleading appearance of active public trading in a security or with intent to create a false or misleading appearance with respect to the market price of a security,
 (a)  effects a transaction in the security that involves no change in the beneficial ownership thereof,

 (b)  enters an order for the purchase of the security, knowing that an order of substantially the same size at substantially the same time and at substantially the same price for the sale of the security has been or will be entered by or for the same or different persons, or

 (c)  enters an order for the sale of the security, knowing that an order of substantially the same size at substantially the same time and at substantially the same price for the purchase of the security has been or will be entered by or for the same or different persons,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 382
 2004, c. 3, s. 4

 Marginal note: Prohibited insider trading
 382.1   (1)  A person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years who, directly or indirectly, buys or sells a security, knowingly using inside information that they
 (a)  possess by virtue of being a shareholder of the issuer of that security;

 (b)  possess by virtue of, or obtained in the course of, their business or professional relationship with that issuer;

 (c)  possess by virtue of, or obtained in the course of, a proposed takeover or reorganization of, or amalgamation, merger or similar business combination with, that issuer;

 (d)  possess by virtue of, or obtained in the course of, their employment, office, duties or occupation with that issuer or with a person referred to in paragraphs (a) to (c); or

 (e)  obtained from a person who possesses or obtained the information in a manner referred to in paragraphs (a) to (d).

 Marginal note: Tipping
 (2)  Except when necessary in the course of business, a person who knowingly conveys inside information that they possess or obtained in a manner referred to in subsection (1) to another person, knowing that there is a risk that the person will use the information to buy or sell, directly or indirectly, a security to which the information relates, or that they may convey the information to another person who may buy or sell such a security, is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Saving
 (3)  For greater certainty, an act is not an offence under this section if it is authorized or required, or is not prohibited, by any federal or provincial Act or regulation applicable to it.

 Definition of inside information
 (4)  In this section, inside information means information relating to or affecting the issuer of a security or a security that they have issued, or are about to issue, that
 (a)  has not been generally disclosed; and

 (b)  could reasonably be expected to significantly affect the market price or value of a security of the issuer.

 2004, c. 3, s. 5

 Marginal note: Gaming in stocks or merchandise
 383   (1)  Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years who, with intent to make gain or profit by the rise or fall in price of the stock of an incorporated or unincorporated company or undertaking, whether in or outside Canada, or of any goods, wares or merchandise,
 (a)  makes or signs, or authorizes to be made or signed, any contract or agreement, oral or written, purporting to be for the purchase or sale of shares of stock or goods, wares or merchandise, without the bona fide intention of acquiring the shares, goods, wares or merchandise or of selling them, as the case may be, or

 (b)  makes or signs, or authorizes to be made or signed, any contract or agreement, oral or written, purporting to be for the sale or purchase of shares of stock or goods, wares or merchandise in respect of which no delivery of the thing sold or purchased is made or received, and without the bona fide intention of making or receiving delivery thereof, as the case may be,

 but this section does not apply where a broker, on behalf of a purchaser, receives delivery, notwithstanding that the broker retains or pledges what is delivered as security for the advance of the purchase money or any part thereof.

 Marginal note: Onus
 (2)  Where, in proceedings under this section, it is established that the accused made or signed a contract or an agreement for the sale or purchase of shares of stock or goods, wares or merchandise, or acted, aided or abetted in the making or signing thereof, the burden of proof of a bona fide intention to acquire or to sell the shares, goods, wares or merchandise or to deliver or to receive delivery thereof, as the case may be, lies on the accused.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 341

 Marginal note: Broker reducing stock by selling for his own account
 384  Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years who, being an individual, or a member or an employee of a partnership, or a director, an officer or an employee of a corporation, where he or the partnership or corporation is employed as a broker by any customer to buy and carry on margin any shares of an incorporated or unincorporated company or undertaking, whether in or out of Canada, thereafter sells or causes to be sold shares of the company or undertaking for any account in which
 (a)  he or his firm or a partner thereof, or

 (b)  the corporation or a director thereof,

 has a direct or indirect interest, if the effect of the sale is, otherwise than unintentionally, to reduce the amount of those shares in the hands of the broker or under his control in the ordinary course of business below the amount of those shares that the broker should be carrying for all customers.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 342

 Marginal note: Fraudulent concealment of title documents
 385   (1)  Every one who, being a vendor or mortgagor of property or of a chose in action or being a solicitor for or agent of a vendor or mortgagor of property or a chose in action, is served with a written demand for an abstract of title by or on behalf of the purchaser or mortgagee before the completion of the purchase or mortgage, and who
 (a)  with intent to defraud and for the purpose of inducing the purchaser or mortgagee to accept the title offered or produced to him, conceals from him any settlement, deed, will or other instrument material to the title, or any encumbrance on the title, or

 (b)  falsifies any pedigree on which the title depends,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Consent required
 (2)  No proceedings shall be instituted under this section without the consent of the Attorney General.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 343

 Marginal note: Fraudulent registration of title
 386  Every one who, as principal or agent, in a proceeding to register title to real property, or in a transaction relating to real property that is or is proposed to be registered, knowingly and with intent to deceive,
 (a)  makes a material false statement or representation,

 (b)  suppresses or conceals from a judge or registrar, or any person employed by or assisting the registrar, any material document, fact, matter or information, or

 (c)  is privy to anything mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b),

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 344

 Marginal note: Fraudulent sale of real property
 387  Every one who, knowing of an unregistered prior sale or of an existing unregistered grant, mortgage, hypothec, privilege or encumbrance of or on real property, fraudulently sells the property or any part thereof is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 345

 Marginal note: Misleading receipt
 388  Every one who wilfully
 (a)  with intent to mislead, injure or defraud any person, whether or not that person is known to him, gives to a person anything in writing that purports to be a receipt for or an acknowledgment of property that has been delivered to or received by him, before the property referred to in the purported receipt or acknowledgment has been delivered to or received by him, or

 (b)  accepts, transmits or uses a purported receipt or acknowledgment to which paragraph (a) applies,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 346

 Marginal note: Fraudulent disposal of goods on which money advanced
 389   (1)  Every one who
 (a)  having shipped or delivered to the keeper of a warehouse or to a factor, an agent or a carrier anything on which the consignee thereof has advanced money or has given valuable security, thereafter, with intent to deceive, defraud or injure the consignee, disposes of it in a manner that is different from and inconsistent with any agreement that has been made in that behalf between him and the consignee, or

 (b)  knowingly and wilfully aids or assists any person to make a disposition of anything to which paragraph (a) applies for the purpose of deceiving, defrauding or injuring the consignee,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Saving
 (2)  No person is guilty of an offence under this section where, before disposing of anything in a manner that is different from and inconsistent with any agreement that has been made in that behalf between him and the consignee, he pays or tenders to the consignee the full amount of money or valuable security that the consignee has advanced.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 347

 Marginal note: Fraudulent receipts under Bank Act
 390  Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years who
 (a)  wilfully makes a false statement in any receipt, certificate or acknowledgment for anything that may be used for a purpose mentioned in the Bank Act ; or

 (b)  wilfully,
 (i)  after giving to another person,

 (ii)  after a person employed by him has, to his knowledge, given to another person, or

 (iii)  after obtaining and endorsing or assigning to another person,

 any receipt, certificate or acknowledgment for anything that may be used for a purpose mentioned in the Bank Act , without the consent in writing of the holder or endorsee or the production and delivery of the receipt, certificate or acknowledgment, alienates or parts with, or does not deliver to the holder or owner the property mentioned in the receipt, certificate or acknowledgment.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 348

 391   [Repealed, 2003, c. 21, s. 6]
 Marginal note: Disposal of property to defraud creditors
 392  Every one who,
 (a)  with intent to defraud his creditors,
 (i)  makes or causes to be made any gift, conveyance, assignment, sale, transfer or delivery of his property, or

 (ii)  removes, conceals or disposes of any of his property, or

 (b)  with intent that any one should defraud his creditors, receives any property by means of or in relation to which an offence has been committed under paragraph (a),

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 350

 Marginal note: Fraud in relation to fares, etc.
 393   (1)  Every one whose duty it is to collect a fare, toll, ticket or admission who wilfully
 (a)  fails to collect it,

 (b)  collects less than the proper amount payable in respect thereof, or

 (c)  accepts any valuable consideration for failing to collect it or for collecting less than the proper amount payable in respect thereof,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (2)  Every one who gives or offers to a person whose duty it is to collect a fare, toll, ticket or admission fee any valuable consideration
 (a)  for failing to collect it, or

 (b)  for collecting an amount less than the amount payable in respect thereof,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Fraudulently obtaining transportation
 (3)  Every one who, by any false pretence or fraud, unlawfully obtains transportation by land, water or air is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 351

 Marginal note: Fraud in relation to valuable minerals
 394   (1)  No person who is the holder of a lease or licence issued under an Act relating to the mining of valuable minerals, or by the owner of land that is supposed to contain valuable minerals, shall
 (a)  by a fraudulent device or contrivance, defraud or attempt to defraud any person of
 (i)  any valuable minerals obtained under or reserved by the lease or licence, or

 (ii)  any money or valuable interest or thing payable in respect of valuable minerals obtained or rights reserved by the lease or licence; or

 (b)  fraudulently conceal or make a false statement with respect to the amount of valuable minerals obtained under the lease or licence.

 Marginal note: Sale of valuable minerals
 (2)  No person, other than the owner or the owner’s agent or someone otherwise acting under lawful authority, shall sell any valuable mineral that is unrefined, partly refined, uncut or otherwise unprocessed.

 Marginal note: Purchase of valuable minerals
 (3)  No person shall buy any valuable mineral that is unrefined, partly refined, uncut or otherwise unprocessed from anyone who the person has reason to believe is not the owner or the owner’s agent or someone otherwise acting under lawful authority.

 Marginal note: Presumption
 (4)  In any proceeding in relation to subsection (2) or (3), in the absence of evidence raising a reasonable doubt to the contrary, it is presumed that
 (a)  in the case of a sale, the seller is not the owner of the valuable mineral or the owner’s agent or someone otherwise acting under lawful authority; and

 (b)  in the case of a purchase, the purchaser, when buying the valuable mineral, had reason to believe that the seller was not the owner of the mineral or the owner’s agent or someone otherwise acting under lawful authority.

 Marginal note: Offence
 (5)  A person who contravenes subsection (1), (2) or (3) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than five years.

 Marginal note: Forfeiture
 (6)  If a person is convicted of an offence under this section, the court may order anything by means of or in relation to which the offence was committed, on such conviction, to be forfeited to Her Majesty.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (7)  Subsection (6) does not apply to real property other than real property built or significantly modified for the purpose of facilitating the commission of an offence under this section.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 394
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 186
 1999, c. 5, s. 10

 Marginal note: Possession of stolen or fraudulently obtained valuable minerals
 394.1   (1)  No person shall possess any valuable mineral that is unrefined, partly refined, uncut or otherwise unprocessed that has been stolen or dealt with contrary to section 394.

 Marginal note: Evidence
 (2)  Reasonable grounds to believe that the valuable mineral has been stolen or dealt with contrary to section 394 are, in the absence of evidence raising a reasonable doubt to the contrary, proof that the valuable mineral has been stolen or dealt with contrary to section 394.

 Marginal note: Offence
 (3)  A person who contravenes subsection (1) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than five years.

 Marginal note: Forfeiture
 (4)  If a person is convicted of an offence under this section, the court may, on that conviction, order that anything by means of or in relation to which the offence was committed be forfeited to Her Majesty.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (5)  Subsection (4) does not apply to real property, other than real property built or significantly modified for the purpose of facilitating the commission of an offence under subsection (3).

 1999, c. 5, s. 10

 Marginal note: Search for valuable minerals
 395   (1)  If an information in writing is laid under oath before a justice by a peace officer or by a public officer who has been appointed or designated to administer or enforce a federal or provincial law and whose duties include the enforcement of this Act or any other Act of Parliament and the justice is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that, contrary to this Act or any other Act of Parliament, any valuable mineral is deposited in a place or held by a person, the justice may issue a warrant authorizing a peace officer or a public officer, if the public officer is named in it, to search any of the places or persons mentioned in the information.

 Marginal note: Power to seize
 (2)  Where, on search, anything mentioned in subsection (1) is found, it shall be seized and carried before the justice who shall order
 (a)  that it be detained for the purposes of an inquiry or a trial; or

 (b)  if it is not detained for the purposes of an inquiry or a trial,
 (i)  that it be restored to the owner, or

 (ii)  that it be forfeited to Her Majesty in right of the province in which the proceedings take place if the owner cannot be ascertained.

 Marginal note: Appeal
 (3)  An appeal lies from an order made under paragraph (2)(b) in the manner in which an appeal lies in summary conviction proceedings under Part XXVII and the provisions of that Part relating to appeals apply to appeals under this subsection.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 395
 1999, c. 5, s. 11

 Marginal note: Offences in relation to mines
 396   (1)  Every one who
 (a)  adds anything to or removes anything from any existing or prospective mine, mining claim or oil well with a fraudulent intent to affect the result of an assay, a test or a valuation that has been made or is to be made with respect to the mine, mining claim or oil well, or

 (b)  adds anything to, removes anything from or tampers with a sample or material that has been taken or is being or is about to be taken from any existing or prospective mine, mining claim or oil well for the purpose of being assayed, tested or otherwise valued, with a fraudulent intent to affect the result of the assay, test or valuation,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Presumption
 (2)  For the purposes of proceedings under subsection (1), evidence that
 (a)  something has been added to or removed from anything to which subsection (1) applies, or

 (b)  anything to which subsection (1) applies has been tampered with,

 is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof of a fraudulent intent to affect the result of an assay, a test or a valuation.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 354

 Falsification of Books and Documents
 Marginal note: Books and documents
 397   (1)  Every one who, with intent to defraud,
 (a)  destroys, mutilates, alters, falsifies or makes a false entry in, or

 (b)  omits a material particular from, or alters a material particular in,

 a book, paper, writing, valuable security or document is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Privy
 (2)  Every one who, with intent to defraud his creditors, is privy to the commission of an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 355

 Marginal note: Falsifying employment record
 398  Every one who, with intent to deceive, falsifies an employment record by any means, including the punching of a time clock, is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 398
 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F)

 Marginal note: False return by public officer
 399  Every one who, being entrusted with the receipt, custody or management of any part of the public revenues, knowingly furnishes a false statement or return of
 (a)  any sum of money collected by him or entrusted to his care, or

 (b)  any balance of money in his hands or under his control,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 357

 Marginal note: False prospectus, etc.
 400   (1)  Every one who makes, circulates or publishes a prospectus, a statement or an account, whether written or oral, that he knows is false in a material particular, with intent
 (a)  to induce persons, whether ascertained or not, to become shareholders or partners in a company,

 (b)  to deceive or defraud the members, shareholders or creditors, whether ascertained or not, of a company, or

 (c)  to induce any person to
 (i)  entrust or advance anything to a company, or

 (ii)  enter into any security for the benefit of a company,

 (d)   [Repealed, 1994, c. 44, s. 26]

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Definition of company
 (2)  In this section, company means a syndicate, body corporate or company, whether existing or proposed to be created.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 400
 1994, c. 44, s. 26

 Marginal note: Obtaining carriage by false billing
 401   (1)  Every one who, by means of a false or misleading representation, knowingly obtains or attempts to obtain the carriage of anything by any person into a country, province, district or other place, whether or not within Canada, where the importation or transportation of it is, in the circumstances of the case, unlawful is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Forfeiture
 (2)  Where a person is convicted of an offence under subsection (1), anything by means of or in relation to which the offence was committed, on such conviction, in addition to any punishment that is imposed, is forfeited to Her Majesty and shall be disposed of as the court may direct.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 359

 Marginal note: Trader failing to keep accounts
 402   (1)  Every one who, being a trader or in business,
 (a)  is indebted in an amount exceeding one thousand dollars,

 (b)  is unable to pay his creditors in full, and

 (c)  has not kept books of account that, in the ordinary course of the trade or business in which he is engaged, are necessary to exhibit or explain his transactions,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Saving
 (2)  No person shall be convicted of an offence under this section
 (a)  where, to the satisfaction of the court or judge, he
 (i)  accounts for his losses, and

 (ii)  shows that his failure to keep books was not intended to defraud his creditors; or

 (b)  where his failure to keep books occurred at a time more than five years prior to the day on which he was unable to pay his creditors in full.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 360

 Personation
 Marginal note: Personation with intent
 403  Every one who fraudulently personates any person, living or dead,
 (a)  with intent to gain advantage for himself or another person,

 (b)  with intent to obtain any property or an interest in any property, or

 (c)  with intent to cause disadvantage to the person whom he personates or another person,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 403
 1994, c. 44, s. 27

 Marginal note: Personation at examination
 404  Every one who falsely, with intent to gain advantage for himself or some other person, personates a candidate at a competitive or qualifying examination held under the authority of law or in connection with a university, college or school or who knowingly avails himself of the results of such personation is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 362

 Marginal note: Acknowledging instrument in false name
 405  Every one who, without lawful authority or excuse, the proof of which lies on him, acknowledges, in the name of another person before a court or a judge or other person authorized to receive the acknowledgment, a recognizance of bail, a confession of judgment, a consent to judgment or a judgment, deed or other instrument is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 363

 Forgery of Trade-marks and Trade Descriptions
 Marginal note: Forging trade-mark
 406  For the purposes of this Part, every one forges a trade-mark who
 (a)  without the consent of the proprietor of the trade-mark, makes or reproduces in any manner that trade-mark or a mark so nearly resembling it as to be calculated to deceive; or

 (b)  falsifies, in any manner, a genuine trade-mark.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 364

 Marginal note: Offence
 407  Every one commits an offence who, with intent to deceive or defraud the public or any person, whether ascertained or not, forges a trade-mark.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 365

 Marginal note: Passing off
 408  Every one commits an offence who, with intent to deceive or defraud the public or any person, whether ascertained or not,
 (a)  passes off other wares or services as and for those ordered or required; or

 (b)  makes use, in association with wares or services, of any description that is false in a material respect regarding
 (i)  the kind, quality, quantity or composition,

 (ii)  the geographical origin, or

 (iii)  the mode of the manufacture, production or performance

 of those wares or services.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 408
 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F)

 Marginal note: Instruments for forging trade-mark
 409   (1)  Every one commits an offence who makes, has in his possession or disposes of a die, block, machine or other instrument designed or intended to be used in forging a trade-mark.

 Marginal note: Saving
 (2)  No person shall be convicted of an offence under this section where he proves that he acted in good faith in the ordinary course of his business or employment.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 367

 Marginal note: Other offences in relation to trade-marks
 410  Every one commits an offence who, with intent to deceive or defraud,
 (a)  defaces, conceals or removes a trade-mark or the name of another person from anything without the consent of that other person; or

 (b)  being a manufacturer, dealer, trader or bottler, fills any bottle or siphon that bears the trade-mark or name of another person, without the consent of that other person, with a beverage, milk, by-product of milk or other liquid commodity for the purpose of sale or traffic.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 368

 Marginal note: Used goods sold without disclosure
 411  Every one commits an offence who sells, exposes or has in his possession for sale, or advertises for sale, goods that have been used, reconditioned or remade and that bear the trade-mark or the trade-name of another person, without making full disclosure that the goods have been reconditioned, rebuilt or remade for sale and that they are not then in the condition in which they were originally made or produced.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 369

 Marginal note: Punishment
 412   (1)  Every one who commits an offence under section 407, 408, 409, 410 or 411 is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Forfeiture
 (2)  Anything by means of or in relation to which a person commits an offence under section 407, 408, 409, 410 or 411 is, unless the court otherwise orders, forfeited on the conviction of that person for that offence.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 370

 Marginal note: Falsely claiming royal warrant
 413  Every one who falsely represents that goods are made by a person holding a royal warrant, or for the service of Her Majesty, a member of the Royal Family or a public department is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 371

 Marginal note: Presumption from port of shipment
 414  Where, in proceedings under this Part, the alleged offence relates to imported goods, evidence that the goods were shipped to Canada from a place outside Canada is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that the goods were made or produced in the country from which they were shipped.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 372

 Wreck
 Marginal note: Offences in relation to wreck
 415  Every one who
 (a)  secretes wreck, defaces or obliterates the marks on wreck or uses any means to disguise or conceal the fact that anything is wreck, or in any manner conceals the character of wreck, from a person who is entitled to inquire into the wreck,

 (b)  receives wreck, knowing that it is wreck, from a person other than the owner thereof or a receiver of wreck, and does not within forty-eight hours thereafter inform the receiver of wreck thereof,

 (c)  offers wreck for sale or otherwise deals with it, knowing that it is wreck, and not having a lawful authority to sell or deal with it,

 (d)  keeps wreck in his possession knowing that it is wreck, without lawful authority to keep it, for any time longer than the time reasonably necessary to deliver it to the receiver of wreck, or

 (e)  boards, against the will of the master, a vessel that is wrecked, stranded or in distress unless he is a receiver of wreck or a person acting under orders of a receiver of wreck,

 is guilty of
 (f)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or

 (g)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 373

 Public Stores
 Marginal note: Distinguishing mark on public stores
 416  The Governor in Council may, by notice to be published in the Canada Gazette , prescribe distinguishing marks that are appropriated for use on public stores to denote the property of Her Majesty therein, whether the stores belong to Her Majesty in right of Canada or to Her Majesty in any other right.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 374

 Marginal note: Applying or removing marks without authority
 417   (1)  Every one who,
 (a)  without lawful authority, the proof of which lies on him, applies a distinguishing mark to anything, or

 (b)  with intent to conceal the property of Her Majesty in public stores, removes, destroys or obliterates, in whole or in part, a distinguishing mark,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Unlawful transactions in public stores
 (2)  Every one who, without lawful authority, the proof of which lies on him, receives, possesses, keeps, sells or delivers public stores that he knows bear a distinguishing mark is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Definition of distinguishing mark
 (3)  For the purposes of this section, distinguishing mark means a distinguishing mark that is appropriated for use on public stores pursuant to section 416.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 375

 Marginal note: Selling defective stores to Her Majesty
 418   (1)  Every one who knowingly sells or delivers defective stores to Her Majesty or commits fraud in connection with the sale, lease or delivery of stores to Her Majesty or the manufacture of stores for Her Majesty is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 Marginal note: Offences by representatives
 (2)  Every one who, being a representative of an organization that commits, by fraud, an offence under subsection (1),
 (a)  knowingly takes part in the fraud, or

 (b)  knows or has reason to suspect that the fraud is being committed or has been or is about to be committed and does not inform the responsible government, or a department thereof, of Her Majesty,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 418
 2003, c. 21, s. 6.1

 Marginal note: Unlawful use of military uniforms or certificates
 419  Every one who without lawful authority, the proof of which lies on him,
 (a)  wears a uniform of the Canadian Forces or any other naval, army or air force or a uniform that is so similar to the uniform of any of those forces that it is likely to be mistaken therefor,

 (b)  wears a distinctive mark relating to wounds received or service performed in war, or a military medal, ribbon, badge, chevron or any decoration or order that is awarded for war services, or any imitation thereof, or any mark or device or thing that is likely to be mistaken for any such mark, medal, ribbon, badge, chevron, decoration or order,

 (c)  has in his possession a certificate of discharge, certificate of release, statement of service or identity card from the Canadian Forces or any other naval, army or air force that has not been issued to and does not belong to him, or

 (d)  has in his possession a commission or warrant or a certificate of discharge, certificate of release, statement of service or identity card, issued to an officer or a person in or who has been in the Canadian Forces or any other naval, army or air force, that contains any alteration that is not verified by the initials of the officer who issued it, or by the initials of an officer thereto lawfully authorized,

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 377

 Marginal note: Military stores
 420   (1)  Every one who buys, receives or detains from a member of the Canadian Forces or a deserter or an absentee without leave therefrom any military stores that are owned by Her Majesty or for which the member, deserter or absentee without leave is accountable to Her Majesty is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (2)  No person shall be convicted of an offence under this section where he establishes that he did not know and had no reason to suspect that the military stores in respect of which the offence was committed were owned by Her Majesty or were military stores for which the member, deserter or absentee without leave was accountable to Her Majesty.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 378

 Marginal note: Evidence of enlistment
 421   (1)  In proceedings under sections 417 to 420, evidence that a person was at any time performing duties in the Canadian Forces is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that his enrolment in the Canadian Forces prior to that time was regular.

 Marginal note: Presumption when accused a dealer in stores
 (2)  An accused who is charged with an offence under subsection 417(2) shall be presumed to have known that the stores in respect of which the offence is alleged to have been committed bore a distinguishing mark within the meaning of that subsection at the time the offence is alleged to have been committed if he was, at that time, in the service or employment of Her Majesty or was a dealer in marine stores or in old metals.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 379

 Breach of Contract, Intimidation and Discrimination Against Trade Unionists
 Marginal note: Criminal breach of contract
 422   (1)  Every one who wilfully breaks a contract, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the probable consequences of doing so, whether alone or in combination with others, will be
 (a)  to endanger human life,

 (b)  to cause serious bodily injury,

 (c)  to expose valuable property, real or personal, to destruction or serious injury,

 (d)  to deprive the inhabitants of a city or place, or part thereof, wholly or to a great extent, of their supply of light, power, gas or water, or

 (e)  to delay or prevent the running of any locomotive engine, tender, freight or passenger train or car, on a railway that is a common carrier,

 is guilty of
 (f)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or

 (g)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Saving
 (2)  No person wilfully breaks a contract within the meaning of subsection (1) by reason only that
 (a)  being the employee of an employer, he stops work as a result of the failure of his employer and himself to agree on any matter relating to his employment, or,

 (b)  being a member of an organization of employees formed for the purpose of regulating relations between employers and employees, he stops work as a result of the failure of the employer and a bargaining agent acting on behalf of the organization to agree on any matter relating to the employment of members of the organization,

 if, before the stoppage of work occurs, all steps provided by law with respect to the settlement of industrial disputes are taken and any provision for the final settlement of differences, without stoppage of work, contained in or by law deemed to be contained in a collective agreement is complied with and effect given thereto.

 Marginal note: Consent required
 (3)  No proceedings shall be instituted under this section without the consent of the Attorney General.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 380

 Marginal note: Intimidation
 423   (1)  Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than five years or is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction who, wrongfully and without lawful authority, for the purpose of compelling another person to abstain from doing anything that he or she has a lawful right to do, or to do anything that he or she has a lawful right to abstain from doing,
 (a)  uses violence or threats of violence to that person or his or her spouse or common-law partner or children, or injures his or her property;

 (b)  intimidates or attempts to intimidate that person or a relative of that person by threats that, in Canada or elsewhere, violence or other injury will be done to or punishment inflicted on him or her or a relative of his or hers, or that the property of any of them will be damaged;

 (c)  persistently follows that person;

 (d)  hides any tools, clothes or other property owned or used by that person, or deprives him or her of them or hinders him or her in the use of them;

 (e)  with one or more other persons, follows that person, in a disorderly manner, on a highway;

 (f)  besets or watches the place where that person resides, works, carries on business or happens to be; or

 (g)  blocks or obstructs a highway.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (2)  A person who attends at or near or approaches a dwelling-house or place, for the purpose only of obtaining or communicating information, does not watch or beset within the meaning of this section.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 423
 2000, c. 12, s. 95
 2001, c. 32, s. 10

 Marginal note: Intimidation of a justice system participant or a journalist
 423.1   (1)  No person shall, without lawful authority, engage in conduct referred to in subsection (2) with the intent to provoke a state of fear in
 (a)  a group of persons or the general public in order to impede the administration of criminal justice;

 (b)  a justice system participant in order to impede him or her in the performance of his or her duties; or

 (c)  a journalist in order to impede him or her in the transmission to the public of information in relation to a criminal organization.

 Marginal note: Prohibited conduct
 (2)  The conduct referred to in subsection (1) consists of
 (a)  using violence against a justice system participant or a journalist or anyone known to either of them or destroying or causing damage to the property of any of those persons;

 (b)  threatening to engage in conduct described in paragraph (a) in Canada or elsewhere;

 (c)  persistently or repeatedly following a justice system participant or a journalist or anyone known to either of them, including following that person in a disorderly manner on a highway;

 (d)  repeatedly communicating with, either directly or indirectly, a justice system participant or a journalist or anyone known to either of them; and

 (e)  besetting or watching the place where a justice system participant or a journalist or anyone known to either of them resides, works, attends school, carries on business or happens to be.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  Every person who contravenes this section is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than fourteen years.

 2001, c. 32, s. 11

 Marginal note: Threat against internationally protected person
 424  Every one who threatens to commit an offence under section 235, 236, 266, 267, 268, 269, 269.1, 271, 272, 273, 279 or 279.1 against an internationally protected person or who threatens to commit an offence under section 431 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than five years.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 424
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 55
 2001, c. 41, s. 11

 Marginal note: Threat against United Nations or associated personnel
 424.1  Every one who, with intent to compel any person, group of persons, state or any international or intergovernmental organization to do or refrain from doing any act, threatens to commit an offence under section 235, 236, 266, 267, 268, 269, 269.1, 271, 272, 273, 279 or 279.1 against a member of United Nations personnel or associated personnel or threatens to commit an offence under section 431.1 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than ten years.
 2001, c. 41, s. 11

 Marginal note: Offences by employers
 425  Every one who, being an employer or the agent of an employer, wrongfully and without lawful authority
 (a)  refuses to employ or dismisses from his employment any person for the reason only that the person is a member of a lawful trade union or of a lawful association or combination of workmen or employees formed for the purpose of advancing, in a lawful manner, their interests and organized for their protection in the regulation of wages and conditions of work,

 (b)  seeks by intimidation, threat of loss of position or employment, or by causing actual loss of position or employment, or by threatening or imposing any pecuniary penalty, to compel workmen or employees to abstain from belonging to any trade union, association or combination to which they have a lawful right to belong, or

 (c)  conspires, combines, agrees or arranges with any other employer or his agent to do anything mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b),

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 382

 Marginal note: Threats and retaliation against employees
 425.1   (1)  No employer or person acting on behalf of an employer or in a position of authority in respect of an employee of the employer shall take a disciplinary measure against, demote, terminate or otherwise adversely affect the employment of such an employee, or threaten to do so,
 (a)  with the intent to compel the employee to abstain from providing information to a person whose duties include the enforcement of federal or provincial law, respecting an offence that the employee believes has been or is being committed contrary to this or any other federal or provincial Act or regulation by the employer or an officer or employee of the employer or, if the employer is a corporation, by one or more of its directors; or

 (b)  with the intent to retaliate against the employee because the employee has provided information referred to in paragraph (a) to a person whose duties include the enforcement of federal or provincial law.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Any one who contravenes subsection (1) is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 2004, c. 3, s. 6

 Secret Commissions
 Marginal note: Secret commissions
 426   (1)  Every one commits an offence who
 (a)  directly or indirectly, corruptly gives, offers or agrees to give or offer to an agent or to anyone for the benefit of the agent — or, being an agent, directly or indirectly, corruptly demands, accepts or offers or agrees to accept from any person, for themselves or another person — any reward, advantage or benefit of any kind as consideration for doing or not doing, or for having done or not done, any act relating to the affairs or business of the agent’s principal, or for showing or not showing favour or disfavour to any person with relation to the affairs or business of the agent’s principal; or

 (b)  with intent to deceive a principal, gives to an agent of that principal, or, being an agent, uses with intent to deceive his principal, a receipt, an account or other writing
 (i)  in which the principal has an interest,

 (ii)  that contains any statement that is false or erroneous or defective in any material particular, and

 (iii)  that is intended to mislead the principal.

 Marginal note: Privity to offence
 (2)  Every one commits an offence who is knowingly privy to the commission of an offence under subsection (1).

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  A person who commits an offence under this section is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Definition of agent and principal
 (4)  In this section, agent includes an employee, and principal includes an employer.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 426
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 56
 2007, c. 13, s. 7

 Trading Stamps
 Marginal note: Issuing trading stamps
 427   (1)  Every one who, by himself or his employee or agent, directly or indirectly issues, gives, sells or otherwise disposes of, or offers to issue, give, sell or otherwise dispose of trading stamps to a merchant or dealer in goods for use in his business is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Giving to purchaser of goods
 (2)  Every one who, being a merchant or dealer in goods, by himself or his employee or agent, directly or indirectly gives or in any way disposes of, or offers to give or in any way dispose of, trading stamps to a person who purchases goods from him is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 384

 PART XI Wilful and Forbidden Acts in Respect of Certain Property
 Interpretation
 Definition of property
 428  In this Part, property means real or personal corporeal property.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 385

 Marginal note: Wilfully causing event to occur
 429   (1)  Every one who causes the occurrence of an event by doing an act or by omitting to do an act that it is his duty to do, knowing that the act or omission will probably cause the occurrence of the event and being reckless whether the event occurs or not, shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Part, wilfully to have caused the occurrence of the event.

 Marginal note: Colour of right
 (2)  No person shall be convicted of an offence under sections 430 to 446 where he proves that he acted with legal justification or excuse and with colour of right.

 Marginal note: Interest
 (3)  Where it is an offence to destroy or to damage anything,
 (a)  the fact that a person has a partial interest in what is destroyed or damaged does not prevent him from being guilty of the offence if he caused the destruction or damage; and

 (b)  the fact that a person has a total interest in what is destroyed or damaged does not prevent him from being guilty of the offence if he caused the destruction or damage with intent to defraud.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 386

 Mischief
 Marginal note: Mischief
 430   (1)  Every one commits mischief who wilfully
 (a)  destroys or damages property;

 (b)  renders property dangerous, useless, inoperative or ineffective;

 (c)  obstructs, interrupts or interferes with the lawful use, enjoyment or operation of property; or

 (d)  obstructs, interrupts or interferes with any person in the lawful use, enjoyment or operation of property.

 Marginal note: Mischief in relation to data
 (1.1)  Every one commits mischief who wilfully
 (a)  destroys or alters data;

 (b)  renders data meaningless, useless or ineffective;

 (c)  obstructs, interrupts or interferes with the lawful use of data; or

 (d)  obstructs, interrupts or interferes with any person in the lawful use of data or denies access to data to any person who is entitled to access thereto.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits mischief that causes actual danger to life is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (3)  Every one who commits mischief in relation to property that is a testamentary instrument or the value of which exceeds five thousand dollars
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (4)  Every one who commits mischief in relation to property, other than property described in subsection (3),
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Mischief relating to religious property
 (4.1)  Every one who commits mischief in relation to property that is a building, structure or part thereof that is primarily used for religious worship, including a church, mosque, synagogue or temple, or an object associated with religious worship located in or on the grounds of such a building or structure, or a cemetery, if the commission of the mischief is motivated by bias, prejudice or hate based on religion, race, colour or national or ethnic origin,
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months.

 Marginal note: Mischief in relation to cultural property
 (4.2)  Every one who commits mischief in relation to cultural property as defined in Article 1 of the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, done at The Hague on May 14, 1954, as set out in the schedule to the Cultural Property Export and Import Act ,
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (5)  Every one who commits mischief in relation to data
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Offence
 (5.1)  Every one who wilfully does an act or wilfully omits to do an act that it is his duty to do, if that act or omission is likely to constitute mischief causing actual danger to life, or to constitute mischief in relation to property or data,
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Saving
 (6)  No person commits mischief within the meaning of this section by reason only that
 (a)  he stops work as a result of the failure of his employer and himself to agree on any matter relating to his employment;

 (b)  he stops work as a result of the failure of his employer and a bargaining agent acting on his behalf to agree on any matter relating to his employment; or

 (c)  he stops work as a result of his taking part in a combination of workmen or employees for their own reasonable protection as workmen or employees.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (7)  No person commits mischief within the meaning of this section by reason only that he attends at or near or approaches a dwelling-house or place for the purpose only of obtaining or communicating information.

 Definition of data
 (8)  In this section, data has the same meaning as in section 342.1.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 430
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 57
 1994, c. 44, s. 28
 2001, c. 41, s. 12
 2005, c. 40, s. 3

 Marginal note: Attack on premises, residence or transport of internationally protected person
 431  Every one who commits a violent attack on the official premises, private accommodation or means of transport of an internationally protected person that is likely to endanger the life or liberty of such a person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than fourteen years.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 431
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 58
 2001, c. 41, s. 13

 Marginal note: Attack on premises, accommodation or transport of United Nations or associated personnel
 431.1  Every one who commits a violent attack on the official premises, private accommodation or means of transport of a member of United Nations personnel or associated personnel that is likely to endanger the life or liberty of such a person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than fourteen years.
 2001, c. 41, s. 13

 Marginal note: Definitions
 431.2   (1)  The following definitions apply in this section.
 explosive or other lethal device explosive or other lethal device  means
 (a)  an explosive or incendiary weapon or device that is designed to cause, or is capable of causing, death, serious bodily injury or substantial material damage; or

 (b)  a weapon or device that is designed to cause, or is capable of causing, death, serious bodily injury or substantial material damage through the release, dissemination or impact of toxic chemicals, biological agents or toxins or similar substances, or radiation or radioactive material. ( engin explosif ou autre engin meurtrier )

 infrastructure facility infrastructure facility  means a publicly or privately owned facility that provides or distributes services for the benefit of the public, including services relating to water, sewage, energy, fuel and communications. ( infrastructure )
 military forces of a state military forces of a state  means the armed forces that a state organizes, trains and equips in accordance with the law of the state for the primary purpose of national defence or national security, and every person acting in support of those armed forces who is under their formal command, control and responsibility. ( forces armées d’un État )
 place of public use place of public use  means those parts of land, a building, street, waterway or other location that are accessible or open to members of the public, whether on a continuous, periodic or occasional basis, and includes any commercial, business, cultural, historical, educational, religious, governmental, entertainment, recreational or other place that is accessible or open to the public on such a basis. ( lieu public )
 public transportation system public transportation system  means a publicly or privately owned facility, conveyance or other thing that is used in connection with publicly available services for the transportation of persons or cargo. ( système de transport public )

 Marginal note: Explosive or other lethal device
 (2)  Every one who delivers, places, discharges or detonates an explosive or other lethal device to, into, in or against a place of public use, a government or public facility, a public transportation system or an infrastructure facility, either with intent to cause death or serious bodily injury or with intent to cause extensive destruction of such a place, system or facility that results in or is likely to result in major economic loss, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Armed forces
 (3)  For greater certainty, subsection (2) does not apply to an act or omission that is committed during an armed conflict and that, at the time and in the place of its commission, is in accordance with customary international law or conventional international law applicable to the conflict, or to activities undertaken by military forces of a state in the exercise of their official duties, to the extent that those activities are governed by other rules of international law.

 2001, c. 41, s. 13

 Marginal note: Unauthorized recording of a movie
 432   (1)  A person who, without the consent of the theatre manager, records in a movie theatre a performance of a cinematographic work within the meaning of section 2 of the Copyright Act or its soundtrack
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Unauthorized recording for purpose of sale, etc.
 (2)  A person who, without the consent of the theatre manager, records in a movie theatre a performance of a cinematographic work within the meaning of section 2 of the Copyright Act or its soundtrack for the purpose of the sale, rental or other commercial distribution of a copy of the cinematographic work
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than five years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Forfeiture
 (3)  In addition to any punishment that is imposed on a person who is convicted of an offence under this section, the court may order that anything that is used in the commission of the offence be forfeited to Her Majesty in right of the province in which the proceedings are taken. Anything that is forfeited may be disposed of as the Attorney General directs.

 Marginal note: Forfeiture — limitation
 (4)  No order may be made under subsection (3) in respect of anything that is the property of a person who is not a party to the offence.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 432
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 58
 2007, c. 28, s. 1

 Arson and Other Fires
 Marginal note: Arson — disregard for human life
 433  Every person who intentionally or recklessly causes damage by fire or explosion to property, whether or not that person owns the property, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life where
 (a)  the person knows that or is reckless with respect to whether the property is inhabited or occupied; or

 (b)  the fire or explosion causes bodily harm to another person.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 433
 1990, c. 15, s. 1

 Marginal note: Arson — damage to property
 434  Every person who intentionally or recklessly causes damage by fire or explosion to property that is not wholly owned by that person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 434
 1990, c. 15, s. 1

 Marginal note: Arson — own property
 434.1  Every person who intentionally or recklessly causes damage by fire or explosion to property that is owned, in whole or in part, by that person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years, where the fire or explosion seriously threatens the health, safety or property of another person.
 1990, c. 15, s. 1

 Marginal note: Arson for fraudulent purpose
 435   (1)  Every person who, with intent to defraud any other person, causes damage by fire or explosion to property, whether or not that person owns, in whole or in part, the property, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 Marginal note: Holder or beneficiary of fire insurance policy
 (2)  Where a person is charged with an offence under subsection (1), the fact that the person was the holder of or was named as a beneficiary under a policy of fire insurance relating to the property in respect of which the offence is alleged to have been committed is a fact from which intent to defraud may be inferred by the court.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 435
 1990, c. 15, s. 1

 Marginal note: Arson by negligence
 436   (1)  Every person who owns, in whole or in part, or controls property is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years where, as a result of a marked departure from the standard of care that a reasonably prudent person would use to prevent or control the spread of fires or to prevent explosions, that person is a cause of a fire or explosion in that property that causes bodily harm to another person or damage to property.

 Marginal note: Non-compliance with prevention laws
 (2)  Where a person is charged with an offence under subsection (1), the fact that the person has failed to comply with any law respecting the prevention or control of fires or explosions in the property is a fact from which a marked departure from the standard of care referred to in that subsection may be inferred by the court.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 436
 1990, c. 15, s. 1

 Marginal note: Possession of incendiary material
 436.1  Every person who possesses any incendiary material, incendiary device or explosive substance for the purpose of committing an offence under any of sections 433 to 436 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 1990, c. 15, s. 1

 Other Interference with Property
 Marginal note: False alarm of fire
 437  Every one who wilfully, without reasonable cause, by outcry, ringing bells, using a fire alarm, telephone or telegraph, or in any other manner, makes or circulates or causes to be made or circulated an alarm of fire is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 393
 1972, c. 13, s. 31

 Marginal note: Interfering with saving of wrecked vessel
 438   (1)  Every one who wilfully prevents or impedes, or who wilfully endeavours to prevent or impede,
 (a)  the saving of a vessel that is wrecked, stranded, abandoned or in distress, or

 (b)  a person who attempts to save a vessel that is wrecked, stranded, abandoned or in distress,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Interfering with saving of wreck
 (2)  Every one who wilfully prevents or impedes or wilfully endeavours to prevent or impede the saving of wreck is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 394

 Marginal note: Interfering with marine signal, etc.
 439   (1)  Every one who makes fast a vessel or boat to a signal, buoy or other sea-mark that is used for purposes of navigation is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (2)  Every one who wilfully alters, removes or conceals a signal, buoy or other sea-mark that is used for purposes of navigation is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 395

 Marginal note: Removing natural bar without permission
 440  Every one who wilfully and without the written permission of the Minister of Transport, the burden of proof of which lies on the accused, removes any stone, wood, earth or other material that forms a natural bar necessary to the existence of a public harbour, or that forms a natural protection to such a bar, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 396

 Marginal note: Occupant injuring building
 441  Every one who, wilfully and to the prejudice of a mortgagee or an owner, pulls down, demolishes or removes all or any part of a dwelling-house or other building of which he is in possession or occupation, or severs from the freehold any fixture fixed therein or thereto, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 397

 Marginal note: Interfering with boundary lines
 442  Every one who wilfully pulls down, defaces, alters or removes anything planted or set up as the boundary line or part of the boundary line of land is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 398

 Marginal note: Interfering with international boundary marks, etc.
 443   (1)  Every one who wilfully pulls down, defaces, alters or removes
 (a)  a boundary mark lawfully placed to mark any international, provincial, county or municipal boundary, or

 (b)  a boundary mark lawfully placed by a land surveyor to mark any limit, boundary or angle of a concession, range, lot or parcel of land,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Saving provision
 (2)  A land surveyor does not commit an offence under subsection (1) where, in his operations as a land surveyor,
 (a)  he takes up, when necessary, a boundary mark mentioned in paragraph (1)(b) and carefully replaces it as it was before he took it up; or

 (b)  he takes up a boundary mark mentioned in paragraph (1)(b) in the course of surveying for a highway or other work that, when completed, will make it impossible or impracticable for that boundary mark to occupy its original position, and he establishes a permanent record of the original position sufficient to permit that position to be ascertained.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 399

 Cattle and Other Animals
 Marginal note: Injuring or endangering cattle
 444  Every one who wilfully
 (a)  kills, maims, wounds, poisons or injures cattle, or

 (b)  places poison in such a position that it may easily be consumed by cattle,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 400

 Marginal note: Injuring or endangering other animals
 445  Every one who wilfully and without lawful excuse
 (a)  kills, maims, wounds, poisons or injures dogs, birds or animals that are not cattle and are kept for a lawful purpose, or

 (b)  places poison in such a position that it may easily be consumed by dogs, birds or animals that are not cattle and are kept for a lawful purpose,

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 401

 Cruelty to Animals
 Marginal note: Causing unnecessary suffering
 446   (1)  Every one commits an offence who
 (a)  wilfully causes or, being the owner, wilfully permits to be caused unnecessary pain, suffering or injury to an animal or a bird;

 (b)  by wilful neglect causes damage or injury to animals or birds while they are being driven or conveyed;

 (c)  being the owner or the person having the custody or control of a domestic animal or a bird or an animal or a bird wild by nature that is in captivity, abandons it in distress or wilfully neglects or fails to provide suitable and adequate food, water, shelter and care for it;

 (d)  in any manner encourages, aids or assists at the fighting or baiting of animals or birds;

 (e)  wilfully, without reasonable excuse, administers a poisonous or an injurious drug or substance to a domestic animal or bird or an animal or a bird wild by nature that is kept in captivity or, being the owner of such an animal or a bird, wilfully permits a poisonous or an injurious drug or substance to be administered to it;

 (f)  promotes, arranges, conducts, assists in, receives money for or takes part in any meeting, competition, exhibition, pastime, practice, display or event at or in the course of which captive birds are liberated by hand, trap, contrivance or any other means for the purpose of being shot when they are liberated; or

 (g)  being the owner, occupier or person in charge of any premises, permits the premises or any part thereof to be used for a purpose mentioned in paragraph (f).

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Failure to exercise reasonable care as evidence
 (3)  For the purposes of proceedings under paragraph (1)(a) or (b), evidence that a person failed to exercise reasonable care or supervision of an animal or a bird thereby causing it pain, suffering, damage or injury is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that the pain, suffering, damage or injury was caused or was permitted to be caused wilfully or was caused by wilful neglect, as the case may be.

 Marginal note: Presence at baiting as evidence
 (4)  For the purpose of proceedings under paragraph (1)(d), evidence that an accused was present at the fighting or baiting of animals or birds is, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, proof that he encouraged, aided or assisted at the fighting or baiting.

 Marginal note: Order of prohibition
 (5)  Where an accused is convicted of an offence under subsection (1), the court may, in addition to any other sentence that may be imposed for the offence, make an order prohibiting the accused from owning or having the custody or control of an animal or a bird during any period not exceeding two years.

 Marginal note: Breach of order
 (6)  Every one who owns or has the custody or control of an animal or a bird while he is prohibited from doing so by reason of an order made under subsection (5) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 402
 1974-75-76, c. 93, s. 35

 Marginal note: Keeping cock-pit
 447   (1)  Every one who builds, makes, maintains or keeps a cockpit on premises that he owns or occupies, or allows a cockpit to be built, made, maintained or kept on such premises is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Confiscation
 (2)  A peace officer who finds cocks in a cockpit or on premises where a cockpit is located shall seize them and take them before a justice who shall order them to be destroyed.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 403

 PART XII Offences Relating to Currency
 Interpretation
 Marginal note: Definitions
 448  In this Part,
 counterfeit money counterfeit money  includes
 (a)  a false coin or false paper money that resembles or is apparently intended to resemble or pass for a current coin or current paper money,

 (b)  a forged bank-note or forged blank bank-note, whether complete or incomplete,

 (c)  a genuine coin or genuine paper money that is prepared or altered to resemble or pass for a current coin or current paper money of a higher denomination,

 (d)  a current coin from which the milling is removed by filing or cutting the edges and on which new milling is made to restore its appearance,

 (e)  a coin cased with gold, silver or nickel, as the case may be, that is intended to resemble or pass for a current gold, silver or nickel coin, and

 (f)  a coin or a piece of metal or mixed metals that is washed or coloured by any means with a wash or material capable of producing the appearance of gold, silver or nickel and that is intended to resemble or pass for a current gold, silver or nickel coin; ( monnaie contrefaite )

 counterfeit token of value counterfeit token of value  means a counterfeit excise stamp, postage stamp or other evidence of value, by whatever technical, trivial or deceptive designation it may be described, and includes genuine coin or paper money that has no value as money; ( symbole de valeur contrefait )
 current current  means lawfully current in Canada or elsewhere by virtue of a law, proclamation or regulation in force in Canada or elsewhere as the case may be; ( courant )
 utter utter  includes sell, pay, tender and put off. ( mettre en circulation )
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 406

 Making
 Marginal note: Making
 449  Every one who makes or begins to make counterfeit money is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 407

 Possession
 Marginal note: Possession, etc., of counterfeit money
 450  Every one who, without lawful justification or excuse, the proof of which lies on him,
 (a)  buys, receives or offers to buy or receive,

 (b)  has in his custody or possession, or

 (c)  introduces into Canada,

 counterfeit money is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 408

 Marginal note: Having clippings, etc.
 451  Every one who, without lawful justification or excuse, the proof of which lies on him, has in his custody or possession
 (a)  gold or silver filings or clippings,

 (b)  gold or silver bullion, or

 (c)  gold or silver in dust, solution or otherwise,

 produced or obtained by impairing, diminishing or lightening a current gold or silver coin, knowing that it has been so produced or obtained, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 409

 Uttering
 Marginal note: Uttering, etc., counterfeit money
 452  Every one who, without lawful justification or excuse, the proof of which lies on him,
 (a)  utters or offers to utter counterfeit money or uses counterfeit money as if it were genuine, or

 (b)  exports, sends or takes counterfeit money out of Canada,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 410

 Marginal note: Uttering coin
 453  Every one who, with intent to defraud, knowingly utters
 (a)  a coin that is not current, or

 (b)  a piece of metal or mixed metals that resembles in size, figure or colour a current coin for which it is uttered,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 411

 Marginal note: Slugs and tokens
 454  Every one who without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him,
 (a)  manufactures, produces or sells, or

 (b)  has in his possession

 anything that is intended to be fraudulently used in substitution for a coin or token of value that any coin or token-operated device is designed to receive is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 412
 1972, c. 13, s. 32

 Defacing or Impairing
 Marginal note: Clipping and uttering clipped coin
 455  Every one who
 (a)  impairs, diminishes or lightens a current gold or silver coin with intent that it should pass for a current gold or silver coin, or

 (b)  utters a coin knowing that it has been impaired, diminished or lightened contrary to paragraph (a),

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 413

 Marginal note: Defacing current coins
 456  Every one who
 (a)  defaces a current coin, or

 (b)  utters a current coin that has been defaced,

 is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 414

 Marginal note: Likeness of bank-notes
 457   (1)  No person shall make, publish, print, execute, issue, distribute or circulate, including by electronic or computer-assisted means, anything in the likeness of
 (a)  a current bank-note; or

 (b)  an obligation or a security of a government or bank.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to
 (a)  the Bank of Canada or its employees when they are carrying out their duties;

 (b)  the Royal Canadian Mounted Police or its members or employees when they are carrying out their duties; or

 (c)  any person acting under a contract or licence from the Bank of Canada or Royal Canadian Mounted Police.

 Marginal note: Offence
 (3)  A person who contravenes subsection (1) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Defence
 (4)  No person shall be convicted of an offence under subsection (3) in relation to the printed likeness of a Canadian bank-note if it is established that the length or width of the likeness is less than three-fourths or greater than one-and-one-half times the length or width, as the case may be, of the bank-note and
 (a)  the likeness is in black-and-white only; or

 (b)  the likeness of the bank-note appears on only one side of the likeness.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 457
 1999, c. 5, s. 12

 Instruments or Materials
 Marginal note: Making, having or dealing in instruments for counterfeiting
 458  Every one who, without lawful justification or excuse, the proof of which lies on him,
 (a)  makes or repairs,

 (b)  begins or proceeds to make or repair,

 (c)  buys or sells, or

 (d)  has in his custody or possession,

 any machine, engine, tool, instrument, material or thing that he knows has been used or that he knows is adapted and intended for use in making counterfeit money or counterfeit tokens of value is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 416

 Marginal note: Conveying instruments for coining out of mint
 459  Every one who, without lawful justification or excuse, the proof of which lies on him, knowingly conveys out of any of Her Majesty’s mints in Canada,
 (a)  any machine, engine, tool, instrument, material or thing used or employed in connection with the manufacture of coins,

 (b)  a useful part of anything mentioned in paragraph (a), or

 (c)  coin, bullion, metal or a mixture of metals,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 417

 Advertising and Trafficking in Counterfeit Money or Counterfeit Tokens of Value
 Marginal note: Advertising and dealing in counterfeit money, etc.
 460   (1)  Every one who
 (a)  by an advertisement or any other writing, offers to sell, procure or dispose of counterfeit money or counterfeit tokens of value or to give information with respect to the manner in which or the means by which counterfeit money or counterfeit tokens of value may be sold, procured or disposed of, or

 (b)  purchases, obtains, negotiates or otherwise deals with counterfeit tokens of value, or offers to negotiate with a view to purchasing or obtaining them,

 is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Fraudulent use of money genuine but valueless
 (2)  No person shall be convicted of an offence under subsection (1) in respect of genuine coin or genuine paper money that has no value as money unless, at the time when the offence is alleged to have been committed, he knew that the coin or paper money had no value as money and he had a fraudulent intent in his dealings with or with respect to the coin or paper money.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 418

 Special Provisions as to Proof
 Marginal note: When counterfeit complete
 461   (1)  Every offence relating to counterfeit money or counterfeit tokens of value shall be deemed to be complete notwithstanding that the money or tokens of value in respect of which the proceedings are taken are not finished or perfected or do not copy exactly the money or tokens of value that they are apparently intended to resemble or for which they are apparently intended to pass.

 Marginal note: Certificate of examiner of counterfeit
 (2)  In any proceedings under this Part, a certificate signed by a person designated as an examiner of counterfeit by the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, stating that any coin, paper money or bank-note described therein is counterfeit money or that any coin, paper money or bank-note described therein is genuine and is or is not, as the case may be, current in Canada or elsewhere, is evidence of the statements contained in the certificate without proof of the signature or official character of the person appearing to have signed the certificate.

 Marginal note: Cross-examination and notice
 (3)  Subsections 258(6) and (7) apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, in respect of a certificate described in subsection (2).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 461
 1992, c. 1, s. 58
 2005, c. 10, s. 34

 Forfeiture
 Marginal note: Ownership
 462   (1)  Counterfeit money, counterfeit tokens of value and anything that is used or is intended to be used to make counterfeit money or counterfeit tokens of value belong to Her Majesty.

 Marginal note: Seizure
 (2)  A peace officer may seize and detain
 (a)  counterfeit money,

 (b)  counterfeit tokens of value, and

 (c)  machines, engines, tools, instruments, materials or things that have been used or that have been adapted and are intended for use in making counterfeit money or counterfeit tokens of value,

 and anything seized shall be sent to the Minister of Finance to be disposed of or dealt with as he may direct, but anything that is required as evidence in any proceedings shall not be sent to the Minister until it is no longer required in those proceedings.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 420

 PART XII.1 Instruments and Literature for Illicit Drug Use
 Interpretation
 Marginal note: Definitions
 462.1  In this Part,
 consume
 consommer
 consume includes inhale, inject into the human body, masticate and smoke; ( consommer )
 illicit drug
 drogue illicite
 illicit drug means a controlled substance or precursor the import, export, production, sale or possession of which is prohibited or restricted pursuant to the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act ; ( drogue illicite )
 illicit drug use
 utilisation de drogues illicites
 illicit drug use means the importation, exportation, production, sale or possession of a controlled substance or precursor contrary to the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act or a regulation made under that Act; ( utilisation de drogues illicites )
 instrument for illicit drug use
 instrument pour l’utilisation de drogues illicites
 instrument for illicit drug use means anything designed primarily or intended under the circumstances for consuming or to facilitate the consumption of an illicit drug, but does not include a device as that term is defined in section 2 of the Food and Drugs Act ; ( instrument pour l’utilisation de drogues illicites )
 literature for illicit drug use
 documentation pour l’utilisation de drogues illicites
 literature for illicit drug use means any printed matter or video describing or depicting, and designed primarily or intended under the circumstances to promote, encourage or advocate, the production, preparation or consumption of illicit drugs; ( documentation pour l’utilisation de drogues illicites )
 sell
 vendre
 sell includes offer for sale, expose for sale, have in possession for sale and distribute, whether or not the distribution is made for consideration. ( vendre )
 R.S., 1985, c. 50 (4th Supp.), s. 1
 1996, c. 19, s. 67

 Offence and Punishment
 Marginal note: Offence
 462.2  Every one who knowingly imports into Canada, exports from Canada, manufactures, promotes or sells instruments or literature for illicit drug use is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction
 (a)  for a first offence, to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand dollars or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to both; or

 (b)  for a second or subsequent offence, to a fine not exceeding three hundred thousand dollars or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or to both.

 R.S., 1985, c. 50 (4th Supp.), s. 1

 PART XII.2 Proceeds of Crime
 Interpretation
 Marginal note: Definitions
 462.3   (1)  In this Part,
 designated drug offence designated drug offence [Repealed, 1996, c. 19, s. 68]
 designated offence
 infraction désignée
 designated offence means
 (a)  any offence that may be prosecuted as an indictable offence under this or any other Act of Parliament, other than an indictable offence prescribed by regulation, or

 (b)  a conspiracy or an attempt to commit, being an accessory after the fact in relation to, or any counselling in relation to, an offence referred to in paragraph (a); ( infraction désignée )

 designated substance offence designated substance offence [Repealed, 2001, c. 32, s. 12]
 enterprise crime offence enterprise crime offence [Repealed, 2001, c. 32, s. 12]
 judge
 juge
 judge means a judge as defined in section 552 or a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction; ( juge )
 proceeds of crime
 produits de la criminalité
 proceeds of crime means any property, benefit or advantage, within or outside Canada, obtained or derived directly or indirectly as a result of
 (a)  the commission in Canada of a designated offence, or

 (b)  an act or omission anywhere that, if it had occurred in Canada, would have constituted a designated offence. ( produits de la criminalité )

 Marginal note: Regulations
 (2)  The Governor in Council may make regulations prescribing indictable offences that are excluded from the definition designated offence in subsection (1).

 Marginal note: Powers of Attorney General of Canada
 (3)  Despite the definition Attorney General in section 2, the Attorney General of Canada may
 (a)  exercise all the powers and perform all the duties and functions assigned to the Attorney General by or under this Act in respect of a designated offence if the alleged offence arises out of conduct that in whole or in part is in relation to an alleged contravention of an Act of Parliament or a regulation made under such an Act, other than this Act or a regulation made under this Act; and

 (b)  conduct proceedings and exercise all the powers and perform all the duties and functions assigned to the Attorney General by or under this Act in respect of
 (i)  an offence referred to in section 354 or 462.31 if the alleged offence arises out of conduct that in whole or in part is in relation to an alleged contravention of an Act of Parliament or a regulation made under such an Act, other than this Act or a regulation made under this Act, and

 (ii)  an offence under subsection 462.33(11) if the restraint order was made on application of the Attorney General of Canada.

 Marginal note: Powers of Attorney General of a province
 (4)  Subsection (3) does not affect the authority of the Attorney General of a province to conduct proceedings in respect of a designated offence or to exercise any of the powers or perform any of the duties and functions assigned to the Attorney General by or under this Act.

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1993, c. 25, s. 95, c. 37, s. 32, c. 46, s. 5
 1994, c. 44, s. 29
 1995, c. 39, s. 151
 1996, c. 19, ss. 68, 70
 1997, c. 18, s. 27, c. 23, s. 9
 1998, c. 34, ss. 9, 11
 1999, c. 5, ss. 13, 52
 2001, c. 32, s. 12, c. 41, ss. 14, 33
 2005, c. 44, s. 1

 Offence
 Marginal note: Laundering proceeds of crime
 462.31   (1)  Every one commits an offence who uses, transfers the possession of, sends or delivers to any person or place, transports, transmits, alters, disposes of or otherwise deals with, in any manner and by any means, any property or any proceeds of any property with intent to conceal or convert that property or those proceeds, knowing or believing that all or a part of that property or of those proceeds was obtained or derived directly or indirectly as a result of
 (a)  the commission in Canada of a designated offence; or

 (b)  an act or omission anywhere that, if it had occurred in Canada, would have constituted a designated offence.

 Marginal note: Punishment
 (2)  Every one who commits an offence under subsection (1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (3)  A peace officer or a person acting under the direction of a peace officer is not guilty of an offence under subsection (1) if the peace officer or person does any of the things mentioned in that subsection for the purposes of an investigation or otherwise in the execution of the peace officer’s duties.

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1996, c. 19, s. 70
 1997, c. 18, s. 28
 2001, c. 32, s. 13
 2005, c. 44, s. 2(F)

 Search, Seizure and Detention of Proceeds of Crime
 Marginal note: Special search warrant
 462.32   (1)  Subject to subsection (3), if a judge, on application of the Attorney General, is satisfied by information on oath in Form 1 that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there is in any building, receptacle or place, within the province in which the judge has jurisdiction or any other province, any property in respect of which an order of forfeiture may be made under subsection 462.37(1) or (2.01) or 462.38(2), in respect of a designated offence alleged to have been committed within the province in which the judge has jurisdiction, the judge may issue a warrant authorizing a person named in the warrant or a peace officer to search the building, receptacle or place for that property and to seize that property and any other property in respect of which that person or peace officer believes, on reasonable grounds, that an order of forfeiture may be made under that subsection.

 Marginal note: Procedure
 (2)  An application for a warrant under subsection (1) may be made ex parte , shall be made in writing and shall include a statement as to whether any previous applications have been made under subsection (1) with respect to the property that is the subject of the application.

 Marginal note: Execution of warrant
 (2.1)  Subject to subsection (2.2), a warrant issued pursuant to subsection (1) may be executed anywhere in Canada.

 Marginal note: Execution in another province
 (2.2)  Where a warrant is issued under subsection (1) in one province but it may be reasonably expected that it is to be executed in another province and the execution of the warrant would require entry into or on the property of any person in the other province, a judge in the other province may, on ex parte application, confirm the warrant, and when the warrant is so confirmed it shall have full force and effect in that other province as though it had originally been issued in that province.

 Marginal note: Execution of warrant in other territorial jurisdictions
 (3)  Subsections 487(2) to (4) and section 488 apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to a warrant issued under this section.

 Marginal note: Detention and record of property seized
 (4)  Every person who executes a warrant issued by a judge under this section shall
 (a)  detain or cause to be detained the property seized, taking reasonable care to ensure that the property is preserved so that it may be dealt with in accordance with the law;

 (b)  as soon as practicable after the execution of the warrant but within a period not exceeding seven days thereafter, prepare a report in Form 5.3, identifying the property seized and the location where the property is being detained, and cause the report to be filed with the clerk of the court; and

 (c)  cause a copy of the report to be provided, on request, to the person from whom the property was seized and to any other person who, in the opinion of the judge, appears to have a valid interest in the property.

 Marginal note: Return of proceeds
 (4.1)  Subject to this or any other Act of Parliament, a peace officer who has seized anything under a warrant issued by a judge under this section may, with the written consent of the Attorney General, on being issued a receipt for it, return the thing seized to the person lawfully entitled to its possession, if
 (a)  the peace officer is satisfied that there is no dispute as to who is lawfully entitled to possession of the thing seized;

 (b)  the peace officer is satisfied that the continued detention of the thing seized is not required for the purpose of forfeiture; and

 (c)  the thing seized is returned before a report is filed with the clerk of the court under paragraph (4)(b).

 Marginal note: Notice
 (5)  Before issuing a warrant under this section in relation to any property, a judge may require notice to be given to and may hear any person who, in the opinion of the judge, appears to have a valid interest in the property unless the judge is of the opinion that giving such notice before the issuance of the warrant would result in the disappearance, dissipation or reduction in value of the property or otherwise affect the property so that all or a part thereof could not be seized pursuant to the warrant.

 Marginal note: Undertakings by Attorney General
 (6)  Before issuing a warrant under this section, a judge shall require the Attorney General to give such undertakings as the judge considers appropriate with respect to the payment of damages or costs, or both, in relation to the issuance and execution of the warrant.

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1997, c. 18, s. 29
 2001, c. 32, s. 14
 2005, c. 44, s. 3

 Marginal note: Application for restraint order
 462.33   (1)  The Attorney General may make an application in accordance with subsection (2) for a restraint order under subsection (3) in respect of any property.

 Marginal note: Procedure
 (2)  An application made under subsection (1) for a restraint order under subsection (3) in respect of any property may be made ex parte and shall be made in writing to a judge and be accompanied by an affidavit sworn on the information and belief of the Attorney General or any other person deposing to the following matters, namely,
 (a)  the offence or matter under investigation;

 (b)  the person who is believed to be in possession of the property;

 (c)  the grounds for the belief that an order of forfeiture may be made under subsection 462.37(1) or (2.01) or 462.38(2) in respect of the property;

 (d)  a description of the property; and

 (e)  whether any previous applications have been made under this section with respect to the property.

 Marginal note: Restraint order
 (3)  A judge who hears an application for a restraint order made under subsection (1) may — if the judge is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there exists, within the province in which the judge has jurisdiction or any other province, any property in respect of which an order of forfeiture may be made under subsection 462.37(1) or (2.01) or 462.38(2), in respect of a designated offence alleged to have been committed within the province in which the judge has jurisdiction — make an order prohibiting any person from disposing of, or otherwise dealing with any interest in, the property specified in the order otherwise than in the manner that may be specified in the order.

 Marginal note: Execution in another province
 (3.01)  Subsections 462.32(2.1) and (2.2) apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, in respect of a restraint order.

 Marginal note: Property outside Canada
 (3.1)  A restraint order may be issued under this section in respect of property situated outside Canada, with any modifications that the circumstances require.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (4)  An order made by a judge under subsection (3) may be subject to such reasonable conditions as the judge thinks fit.

 Marginal note: Notice
 (5)  Before making an order under subsection (3) in relation to any property, a judge may require notice to be given to and may hear any person who, in the opinion of the judge, appears to have a valid interest in the property unless the judge is of the opinion that giving such notice before making the order would result in the disappearance, dissipation or reduction in value of the property or otherwise affect the property so that all or a part thereof could not be subject to an order of forfeiture under subsection 462.37(1) or (2.01) or 462.38(2).

 Marginal note: Order in writing
 (6)  An order made under subsection (3) shall be made in writing.

 Marginal note: Undertakings by Attorney General
 (7)  Before making an order under subsection (3), a judge shall require the Attorney General to give such undertakings as the judge considers appropriate with respect to the payment of damages or costs, or both, in relation to
 (a)  the making of an order in respect of property situated within or outside Canada; and

 (b)  the execution of an order in respect of property situated within Canada.

 Marginal note: Service of order
 (8)  A copy of an order made by a judge under subsection (3) shall be served on the person to whom the order is addressed in such manner as the judge directs or as may be prescribed by rules of court.

 Marginal note: Registration of order
 (9)  A copy of an order made under subsection (3) shall be registered against any property in accordance with the laws of the province in which the property is situated.

 Marginal note: Continues in force
 (10)  An order made under subsection (3) remains in effect until
 (a)  it is revoked or varied under subsection 462.34(4) or revoked under paragraph 462.43(a);

 (b)  it ceases to be in force under section 462.35; or

 (c)  an order of forfeiture or restoration of the property is made under subsection 462.37(1) or (2.01), 462.38(2) or 462.41(3) or any other provision of this or any other Act of Parliament.

 Marginal note: Offence
 (11)  Any person on whom an order made under subsection (3) is served in accordance with this section and who, while the order is in force, acts in contravention of or fails to comply with the order is guilty of an indictable offence or an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1993, c. 37, s. 21
 1996, c. 16, s. 60
 1997, c. 18, s. 30
 2001, c. 32, s. 15
 2005, c. 44, s. 4

 Marginal note: Management order
 462.331   (1)  With respect to property seized under section 462.32 or restrained under section 462.33, other than a controlled substance within the meaning of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act , on application of the Attorney General or of any other person with the written consent of the Attorney General, where a judge is of the opinion that the circumstances so require, the judge may
 (a)  appoint a person to take control of and to manage or otherwise deal with all or part of the property in accordance with the directions of the judge; and

 (b)  require any person having possession of that property to give possession of the property to the person appointed under paragraph (a).

 Marginal note: Appointment of Minister of Public Works and Government Services
 (2)  When the Attorney General of Canada so requests, a judge appointing a person under subsection (1) shall appoint the Minister of Public Works and Government Services.

 Marginal note: Power to manage
 (3)  The power to manage or otherwise deal with property under subsection (1) includes
 (a)  in the case of perishable or rapidly depreciating property, the power to make an interlocutory sale of that property; and

 (b)  in the case of property that has little or no value, the power to destroy that property.

 Marginal note: Application for destruction order
 (4)  Before a person appointed to manage property destroys property that has little or no value, he or she shall apply to a court for a destruction order.

 Marginal note: Notice
 (5)  Before making a destruction order in relation to any property, a court shall require notice in accordance with subsection (6) to be given to, and may hear, any person who, in the opinion of the court, appears to have a valid interest in the property.

 Marginal note: Manner of giving notice
 (6)  A notice shall
 (a)  be given or served in the manner that the court directs or that may be specified in the rules of the court; and

 (b)  be of any duration that the court considers reasonable or that may be specified in the rules of the court.

 Marginal note: Order
 (7)  A court may order that the property be destroyed if it is satisfied that the property has little or no value, whether financial or other.

 Marginal note: When management order ceases to have effect
 (8)  A management order ceases to have effect when the property that is the subject of the management order is returned in accordance with the law to an applicant or forfeited to Her Majesty.

 Marginal note: Application to vary conditions
 (9)  The Attorney General may at any time apply to the judge to cancel or vary any condition to which a management order is subject but may not apply to vary an appointment made under subsection (2).

 2001, c. 32, s. 16

 Marginal note: Application for review of special warrants and restraint orders
 462.34   (1)  Any person who has an interest in property that was seized under a warrant issued pursuant to section 462.32 or in respect of which a restraint order was made under subsection 462.33(3) may, at any time, apply to a judge
 (a)  for an order under subsection (4); or

 (b)  for permission to examine the property.

 Marginal note: Notice to Attorney General
 (2)  Where an application is made under paragraph (1)(a),
 (a)  the application shall not, without the consent of the Attorney General, be heard by a judge unless the applicant has given to the Attorney General at least two clear days notice in writing of the application; and

 (b)  the judge may require notice of the application to be given to and may hear any person who, in the opinion of the judge, appears to have a valid interest in the property.

 Marginal note: Terms of examination order
 (3)  A judge may, on an application made to the judge under paragraph (1)(b), order that the applicant be permitted to examine property subject to such terms as appear to the judge to be necessary or desirable to ensure that the property is safeguarded and preserved for any purpose for which it may subsequently be required.

 Marginal note: Order of restoration of property or revocation or variation of order
 (4)  On an application made to a judge under paragraph (1)(a) in respect of any property and after hearing the applicant and the Attorney General and any other person to whom notice was given pursuant to paragraph (2)(b), the judge may order that the property or a part thereof be returned to the applicant or, in the case of a restraint order made under subsection 462.33(3), revoke the order, vary the order to exclude the property or any interest in the property or part thereof from the application of the order or make the order subject to such reasonable conditions as the judge thinks fit,
 (a)  if the applicant enters into a recognizance before the judge, with or without sureties, in such amount and with such conditions, if any, as the judge directs and, where the judge considers it appropriate, deposits with the judge such sum of money or other valuable security as the judge directs;

 (b)  if the conditions referred to in subsection (6) are satisfied; or

 (c)  for the purpose of
 (i)  meeting the reasonable living expenses of the person who was in possession of the property at the time the warrant was executed or the order was made or any person who, in the opinion of the judge, has a valid interest in the property and of the dependants of that person,

 (ii)  meeting the reasonable business and legal expenses of a person referred to in subparagraph (i), or

 (iii)  permitting the use of the property in order to enter into a recognizance under Part XVI,

 if the judge is satisfied that the applicant has no other assets or means available for the purposes set out in this paragraph and that no other person appears to be the lawful owner of or lawfully entitled to possession of the property.

 Marginal note: Hearing
 (5)  For the purpose of determining the reasonableness of legal expenses referred to in subparagraph (4)(c)(ii), a judge shall hold an in camera hearing, without the presence of the Attorney General, and shall take into account the legal aid tariff of the province.

 Marginal note: Expenses
 (5.1)  For the purpose of determining the reasonableness of expenses referred to in paragraph (4)(c), the Attorney General may
 (a)  at the hearing of the application, make representations as to what would constitute the reasonableness of the expenses, other than legal expenses; and

 (b)  before or after the hearing of the application held in camera pursuant to subsection (5), make representations as to what would constitute reasonable legal expenses referred to in subparagraph (4)(c)(ii).

 Marginal note: Taxing legal fees
 (5.2)  The judge who made an order under paragraph (4)(c) may, and on the application of the Attorney General shall, tax the legal fees forming part of the legal expenses referred to in subparagraph (4)(c)(ii) and, in so doing, shall take into account
 (a)  the value of property in respect of which an order of forfeiture may be made;

 (b)  the complexity of the proceedings giving rise to those legal expenses;

 (c)  the importance of the issues involved in those proceedings;

 (d)  the duration of any hearings held in respect of those proceedings;

 (e)  whether any stage of those proceedings was improper or vexatious;

 (f)  any representations made by the Attorney General; and

 (g)  any other relevant matter.

 Marginal note: Conditions to be satisfied
 (6)  An order under paragraph (4)(b) in respect of property may be made by a judge if the judge is satisfied
 (a)  where the application is made by
 (i)  a person charged with a designated offence, or

 (ii)  any person who acquired title to or a right of possession of that property from a person referred to in subparagraph (i) under circumstances that give rise to a reasonable inference that the title or right was transferred from that person for the purpose of avoiding the forfeiture of the property,

 that a warrant should not have been issued pursuant to section 462.32 or a restraint order under subsection 462.33(3) should not have been made in respect of that property, or

 (b)  in any other case, that the applicant is the lawful owner of or lawfully entitled to possession of the property and appears innocent of any complicity in a designated offence or of any collusion in relation to such an offence, and that no other person appears to be the lawful owner of or lawfully entitled to possession of the property,

 and that the property will no longer be required for the purpose of any investigation or as evidence in any proceeding.

 Marginal note: Saving provision
 (7)  Section 354 of this Act does not apply to a person who comes into possession of any property or thing that, pursuant to an order made under paragraph (4)(c), was returned to any person after having been seized or was excluded from the application of a restraint order made under subsection 462.33(3).

 Marginal note: Form of recognizance
 (8)  A recognizance entered into pursuant to paragraph (4)(a) may be in Form 32.

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1996, c. 19, ss. 69, 70
 1997, c. 18, ss. 31, 140
 2001, c. 32, s. 17

 Marginal note: Application of property restitution provisions
 462.341  Subsection 462.34(2), paragraph 462.34(4)(c) and subsections 462.34(5), (5.1) and (5.2) apply, with any modifications that the circumstances require, to a person who has an interest in money or bank-notes that are seized under this Act or the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act and in respect of which proceedings may be taken under subsection 462.37(1) or (2.01) or 462.38(2).
 1997, c. 18, ss. 32, 140
 1999, c. 5, s. 14
 2005, c. 44, s. 5

 Marginal note: Expiration of special warrants and restraint orders
 462.35   (1)  Subject to this section, where property has been seized under a warrant issued pursuant to section 462.32 or a restraint order has been made under section 462.33 in relation to property, the property may be detained or the order may continue in force, as the case may be, for a period not exceeding six months from the seizure or the making of the order, as the case may be.

 Marginal note: Where proceedings instituted
 (2)  The property may continue to be detained, or the order may continue in force, for a period that exceeds six months if proceedings are instituted in respect of which the thing detained may be forfeited.

 Marginal note: Where application made
 (3)  The property may continue to be detained or the order may continue in force for a period or periods that exceed six months if the continuation is, on application made by the Attorney General, ordered by a judge, where the judge is satisfied that the property is required, after the expiration of the period or periods, for the purpose of section 462.37 or 462.38 or any other provision of this or any other Act of Parliament respecting forfeiture or for the purpose of any investigation or as evidence in any proceeding.

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1997, c. 18, s. 33

 Marginal note: Forwarding to clerk where accused to stand trial
 462.36  Where a judge issues a warrant under section 462.32 or makes a restraint order under section 462.33 in respect of any property, the clerk of the court shall, when an accused is ordered to stand trial for a designated offence, cause to be forwarded to the clerk of the court to which the accused has been ordered to stand trial a copy of the report filed pursuant to paragraph 462.32(4)(b) or of the restraint order in respect of the property.
 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 2001, c. 32, s. 18

 Forfeiture of Proceeds of Crime
 Marginal note: Order of forfeiture of property on conviction
 462.37   (1)  Subject to this section and sections 462.39 to 462.41, where an offender is convicted, or discharged under section 730, of a designated offence and the court imposing sentence on the offender, on application of the Attorney General, is satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that any property is proceeds of crime and that the designated offence was committed in relation to that property, the court shall order that the property be forfeited to Her Majesty to be disposed of as the Attorney General directs or otherwise dealt with in accordance with the law.

 Marginal note: Proceeds of crime derived from other offences
 (2)  Where the evidence does not establish to the satisfaction of the court that the designated offence of which the offender is convicted, or discharged under section 730, was committed in relation to property in respect of which an order of forfeiture would otherwise be made under subsection (1) but the court is satisfied, beyond a reasonable doubt, that that property is proceeds of crime, the court may make an order of forfeiture under subsection (1) in relation to that property.

 Marginal note: Order of forfeiture — particular circumstances
 (2.01)  A court imposing sentence on an offender convicted of an offence described in subsection (2.02) shall, on application of the Attorney General and subject to this section and sections 462.4 and 462.41, order that any property of the offender that is identified by the Attorney General in the application be forfeited to Her Majesty to be disposed of as the Attorney General directs or otherwise dealt with in accordance with the law if the court is satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that
 (a)  within 10 years before the proceedings were commenced in respect of the offence for which the offender is being sentenced, the offender engaged in a pattern of criminal activity for the purpose of directly or indirectly receiving a material benefit, including a financial benefit; or

 (b)  the income of the offender from sources unrelated to designated offences cannot reasonably account for the value of all the property of the offender.

 Marginal note: Offences
 (2.02)  The offences are the following:
 (a)  a criminal organization offence punishable by five or more years of imprisonment; and

 (b)  an offence under section 5, 6 or 7 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act — or a conspiracy or an attempt to commit, being an accessory after the fact in relation to, or any counselling in relation to an offence under those sections — prosecuted by indictment.

 Marginal note: Offender may establish that property is not proceeds of crime
 (2.03)  A court shall not make an order of forfeiture under subsection (2.01) in respect of any property that the offender establishes, on a balance of probabilities, is not proceeds of crime.

 Marginal note: Pattern of criminal activity
 (2.04)  In determining whether the offender has engaged in a pattern of criminal activity described in paragraph (2.01)(a), the court shall consider
 (a)  the circumstances of the offence for which the offender is being sentenced;

 (b)  any act or omission — other than an act or omission that constitutes the offence for which the offender is being sentenced — that the court is satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, was committed by the offender and constitutes an offence punishable by indictment under any Act of Parliament;

 (c)  any act or omission that the court is satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, was committed by the offender and is an offence in the place where it was committed and, if committed in Canada, would constitute an offence punishable by indictment under any Act of Parliament; and

 (d)  any other factor that the court considers relevant.

 Marginal note: Conditions — pattern of criminal activity
 (2.05)  A court shall not determine that an offender has engaged in a pattern of criminal activity unless the court is satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that the offender committed, within the period referred to in paragraph (2.01)(a),
 (a)  acts or omissions — other than an act or omission that constitutes the offence for which the offender is being sentenced — that constitute at least two serious offences or one criminal organization offence;

 (b)  acts or omissions that are offences in the place where they were committed and, if committed in Canada, would constitute at least two serious offences or one criminal organization offence; or

 (c)  an act or omission described in paragraph (a) that constitutes a serious offence and an act or omission described in paragraph (b) that, if committed in Canada, would constitute a serious offence.

 Marginal note: Application under subsection (1) not prevented
 (2.06)  Nothing in subsection (2.01) shall be interpreted as preventing the Attorney General from making an application under subsection (1) in respect of any property.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (2.07)  A court may, if it considers it in the interests of justice, decline to make an order of forfeiture against any property that would otherwise be subject to forfeiture under subsection (2.01). The court shall give reasons for its decision.

 Marginal note: Property outside Canada
 (2.1)  An order may be issued under this section in respect of property situated outside Canada, with any modifications that the circumstances require.

 Marginal note: Fine instead of forfeiture
 (3)  If a court is satisfied that an order of forfeiture under subsection (1) or (2.01) should be made in respect of any property of an offender but that the property or any part of or interest in the property cannot be made subject to an order, the court may, instead of ordering the property or any part of or interest in the property to be forfeited, order the offender to pay a fine in an amount equal to the value of the property or the part of or interest in the property. In particular, a court may order the offender to pay a fine if the property or any part of or interest in the property
 (a)  cannot, on the exercise of due diligence, be located;

 (b)  has been transferred to a third party;

 (c)  is located outside Canada;

 (d)  has been substantially diminished in value or rendered worthless; or

 (e)  has been commingled with other property that cannot be divided without difficulty.

 Marginal note: Imprisonment in default of payment of fine
 (4)  Where a court orders an offender to pay a fine pursuant to subsection (3), the court shall
 (a)  impose, in default of payment of that fine, a term of imprisonment
 (i)  not exceeding six months, where the amount of the fine does not exceed ten thousand dollars,

 (ii)  of not less than six months and not exceeding twelve months, where the amount of the fine exceeds ten thousand dollars but does not exceed twenty thousand dollars,

 (iii)  of not less than twelve months and not exceeding eighteen months, where the amount of the fine exceeds twenty thousand dollars but does not exceed fifty thousand dollars,

 (iv)  of not less than eighteen months and not exceeding two years, where the amount of the fine exceeds fifty thousand dollars but does not exceed one hundred thousand dollars,

 (v)  of not less than two years and not exceeding three years, where the amount of the fine exceeds one hundred thousand dollars but does not exceed two hundred and fifty thousand dollars,

 (vi)  of not less than three years and not exceeding five years, where the amount of the fine exceeds two hundred and fifty thousand dollars but does not exceed one million dollars, or

 (vii)  of not less than five years and not exceeding ten years, where the amount of the fine exceeds one million dollars; and

 (b)  direct that the term of imprisonment imposed pursuant to paragraph (a) be served consecutively to any other term of imprisonment imposed on the offender or that the offender is then serving.

 Marginal note: Fine option program not available to offender
 (5)  Section 736 does not apply to an offender against whom a fine is imposed pursuant to subsection (3).

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F)
 1995, c. 22, s. 10
 1999, c. 5, s. 15(F)
 2001, c. 32, s. 19
 2005, c. 44, s. 6

 Marginal note: Definition of order
 462.371   (1)  In this section, order means an order made under section 462.37 or 462.38.

 Marginal note: Execution
 (2)  An order may be executed anywhere in Canada.

 Marginal note: Filing of order from another province
 (3)  Where the Attorney General of a province in which property that is the subject of an order made in another province is situated receives a certified copy of the order and files it with the superior court of criminal jurisdiction of the province in which the property is situated, the order shall be entered as a judgment of that court.

 Marginal note: Attorney General of Canada
 (4)  Where the Attorney General of Canada receives a certified copy of an order made in a province in respect of property situated in another province and files the order with the superior court of criminal jurisdiction of the province in which the property is situated, the order shall be entered as a judgment of that court.

 Marginal note: Effect of registered order
 (5)  An order has, from the date it is filed in a court of a province under subsection (3) or (4), the same effect as if it had been an order originally made by that court.

 Marginal note: Notice
 (6)  Where an order has been filed in a court under subsection (3) or (4), it shall not be executed before notice in accordance with subsection 462.41(2) is given to every person who, in the opinion of the court, appears to have a valid interest in the property.

 Marginal note: Application of section 462.42
 (7)  Section 462.42 applies, with such modifications as the circumstances require, in respect of a person who claims an interest in property that is the subject of an order filed under subsection (3) or (4).

 Marginal note: Application under section 462.42 to be made in one province
 (8)  No person may make an application under section 462.42 in relation to property that is the subject of an order filed under subsection (3) or (4) if that person has previously made an application in respect of the same property in another province.

 Marginal note: Finding in one court binding
 (9)  The finding by a court of a province in relation to property that is the subject of an order filed under subsection (3) or (4) as to whether or not an applicant referred to in subsection 462.42(4) is affected by the forfeiture referred to in that subsection or declaring the nature and extent of the interest of the applicant under that subsection is binding on the superior court of criminal jurisdiction of the province where the order is entered as a judgment.

 1997, c. 18, s. 34

 Marginal note: Application for forfeiture
 462.38   (1)  Where an information has been laid in respect of a designated offence, the Attorney General may make an application to a judge for an order of forfeiture under subsection (2) in respect of any property.

 Marginal note: Order of forfeiture of property
 (2)  Subject to sections 462.39 to 462.41, where an application is made to a judge under subsection (1), the judge shall, if the judge is satisfied that
 (a)  any property is, beyond a reasonable doubt, proceeds of crime,

 (b)  proceedings in respect of a designated offence committed in relation to that property were commenced, and

 (c)  the accused charged with the offence referred to in paragraph (b) has died or absconded,

 order that the property be forfeited to Her Majesty to be disposed of as the Attorney General directs or otherwise dealt with in accordance with the law.

 Marginal note: Property outside Canada
 (2.1)  An order may be issued under this section in respect of property situated outside Canada, with any modifications that the circumstances require.

 Marginal note: Person deemed absconded
 (3)  For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to have absconded in connection with a designated offence if
 (a)  an information has been laid alleging the commission of the offence by the person,

 (b)  a warrant for the arrest of the person or a summons in respect of an organization has been issued in relation to that information, and

 (c)  reasonable attempts to arrest the person pursuant to the warrant or to serve the summons have been unsuccessful during the period of six months commencing on the day the warrant or summons was issued, or, in the case of a person who is not or never was in Canada, the person cannot be brought within that period to the jurisdiction in which the warrant or summons was issued,

 and the person shall be deemed to have so absconded on the last day of that period of six months.

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1997, c. 18, s. 35
 2001, c. 32, s. 20
 2003, c. 21, s. 7

 Marginal note: Inference
 462.39  For the purpose of subsection 462.37(1) or 462.38(2), the court may infer that property was obtained or derived as a result of the commission of a designated offence where evidence establishes that the value, after the commission of that offence, of all the property of the person alleged to have committed the offence exceeds the value of all the property of that person before the commission of that offence and the court is satisfied that the income of that person from sources unrelated to designated offences committed by that person cannot reasonably account for such an increase in value.
 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1996, c. 19, s. 70
 2001, c. 32, s. 21

 Marginal note: Voidable transfers
 462.4  A court may,
 (a)  prior to ordering property to be forfeited under subsection 462.37(1) or (2.01) or 462.38(2), and

 (b)  in the case of property in respect of which a restraint order was made under section 462.33, where the order was served in accordance with subsection 462.33(8),

 set aside any conveyance or transfer of the property that occurred after the seizure of the property or the service of the order under section 462.33, unless the conveyance or transfer was for valuable consideration to a person acting in good faith.
 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1997, c. 18, s. 36(E)
 2005, c. 44, s. 7

 Marginal note: Notice
 462.41   (1)  Before making an order under subsection 462.37(1) or (2.01) or 462.38(2) in relation to any property, a court shall require notice in accordance with subsection (2) to be given to and may hear any person who, in the opinion of the court, appears to have a valid interest in the property.

 Marginal note: Service, duration and contents of notice
 (2)  A notice given under subsection (1) shall
 (a)  be given or served in such manner as the court directs or as may be prescribed by the rules of the court;

 (b)  be of such duration as the court considers reasonable or as may be prescribed by the rules of the court; and

 (c)  set out the designated offence charged and a description of the property.

 Marginal note: Order of restoration of property
 (3)  Where a court is satisfied that any person, other than
 (a)  a person who is charged with, or was convicted of, a designated offence, or

 (b)  a person who acquired title to or a right of possession of that property from a person referred to in paragraph (a) under circumstances that give rise to a reasonable inference that the title or right was transferred for the purpose of avoiding the forfeiture of the property,

 is the lawful owner or is lawfully entitled to possession of any property or any part thereof that would otherwise be forfeited pursuant to subsection 462.37(1) or (2.01) or 462.38(2) and that the person appears innocent of any complicity in an offence referred to in paragraph (a) or of any collusion in relation to such an offence, the court may order that the property or part thereof be returned to that person.

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1996, c. 19, s. 70
 1997, c. 18, ss. 37, 140
 2001, c. 32, s. 22
 2005, c. 44, s. 8

 Marginal note: Application by person claiming interest for relief from forfeiture
 462.42   (1)  Any person who claims an interest in property that is forfeited to Her Majesty under subsection 462.37(1) or (2.01) or 462.38(2) may, within thirty days after the forfeiture, apply by notice in writing to a judge for an order under subsection (4) unless the person is
 (a)  a person who is charged with, or was convicted of, a designated offence that resulted in the forfeiture; or

 (b)  a person who acquired title to or a right of possession of the property from a person referred to in paragraph (a) under circumstances that give rise to a reasonable inference that the title or right was transferred from that person for the purpose of avoiding the forfeiture of the property.

 Marginal note: Fixing day for hearing
 (2)  The judge to whom an application is made under subsection (1) shall fix a day not less than thirty days after the date of filing of the application for the hearing thereof.

 Marginal note: Notice
 (3)  An applicant shall serve a notice of the application made under subsection (1) and of the hearing thereof on the Attorney General at least fifteen days before the day fixed for the hearing.

 Marginal note: Order declaring interest not subject to forfeiture
 (4)  Where, on the hearing of an application made under subsection (1), the judge is satisfied that the applicant is not a person referred to in paragraph (1)(a) or (b) and appears innocent of any complicity in any designated offence that resulted in the forfeiture or of any collusion in relation to any such offence, the judge may make an order declaring that the interest of the applicant is not affected by the forfeiture and declaring the nature and extent of the interest.

 Marginal note: Appeal from order under subsection (4)
 (5)  An applicant or the Attorney General may appeal to the court of appeal from an order under subsection (4) and the provisions of Part XXI with respect to procedure on appeals apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to appeals under this subsection.

 Marginal note: Return of property
 (6)  The Attorney General shall, on application made to the Attorney General by any person who has obtained an order under subsection (4) and where the periods with respect to the taking of appeals from that order have expired and any appeal from that order taken under subsection (5) has been determined,
 (a)  direct that the property or the part thereof to which the interest of the applicant relates be returned to the applicant; or

 (b)  direct that an amount equal to the value of the interest of the applicant, as declared in the order, be paid to the applicant.

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1996, c. 19, s. 70
 1997, c. 18, ss. 38, 140
 2001, c. 32, s. 23
 2005, c. 44, s. 9

 Marginal note: Residual disposal of property seized or dealt with pursuant to special warrants or restraint orders
 462.43   (1)  Where property has been seized under a warrant issued pursuant to section 462.32, a restraint order has been made under section 462.33 in relation to any property or a recognizance has been entered into pursuant to paragraph 462.34(4)(a) in relation to any property and a judge, on application made to the judge by the Attorney General or any person having an interest in the property or on the judge’s own motion, after notice given to the Attorney General and any other person having an interest in the property, is satisfied that the property will no longer be required for the purpose of section 462.37, 462.38 or any other provision of this or any other Act of Parliament respecting forfeiture or for the purpose of any investigation or as evidence in any proceeding, the judge
 (a)  in the case of a restraint order, shall revoke the order;

 (b)  in the case of a recognizance, shall cancel the recognizance; and

 (c)  in the case of property seized under a warrant issued pursuant to section 462.32 or property under the control of a person appointed pursuant to paragraph 462.331(1)(a),
 (i)  if possession of it by the person from whom it was taken is lawful, shall order that it be returned to that person,

 (ii)  if possession of it by the person from whom it was taken is unlawful and the lawful owner or person who is lawfully entitled to its possession is known, shall order that it be returned to the lawful owner or the person who is lawfully entitled to its possession, or

 (iii)  if possession of it by the person from whom it was taken is unlawful and the lawful owner or person who is lawfully entitled to its possession is not known, may order that it be forfeited to Her Majesty, to be disposed of as the Attorney General directs, or otherwise dealt with in accordance with the law.

 Marginal note: Property outside Canada
 (2)  An order may be issued under this section in respect of property situated outside Canada, with any modifications that the circumstances require.

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 2001, c. 32, s. 24
 2004, c. 12, s. 7

 Marginal note: Appeals from certain orders
 462.44  Any person who considers that they are aggrieved by an order made under subsection 462.38(2) or 462.41(3) or section 462.43 may appeal from the order as if the order were an appeal against conviction or against a judgment or verdict of acquittal, as the case may be, under Part XXI, and that Part applies, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to such an appeal.
 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1997, c. 18, s. 39

 Marginal note: Suspension of forfeiture pending appeal
 462.45  Despite anything in this Part, the operation of an order of forfeiture or restoration of property under subsection 462.34(4), 462.37(1) or (2.01), 462.38(2) or 462.41(3) or section 462.43 is suspended pending
 (a)  any application made in respect of the property under any of those provisions or any other provision of this or any other Act of Parliament that provides for the restoration or forfeiture of such property,

 (b)  any appeal taken from an order of forfeiture or restoration in respect of the property, or

 (c)  any other proceeding in which the right of seizure of the property is questioned,

 and property shall not be disposed of within thirty days after an order of forfeiture is made under any of those provisions.
 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 2005, c. 44, s. 10

 Marginal note: Copies of documents returned or forfeited
 462.46   (1)  If any document is returned or ordered to be returned, forfeited or otherwise dealt with under subsection 462.34(3) or (4), 462.37(1) or (2.01), 462.38(2) or 462.41(3) or section 462.43, the Attorney General may, before returning the document or complying with the order, cause a copy of the document to be made and retained.

 Marginal note: Probative force
 (2)  Every copy made under subsection (1) shall, if certified as a true copy by the Attorney General, be admissible in evidence and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, shall have the same probative force as the original document would have had if it had been proved in the ordinary way.

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 2005, c. 44, s. 11

 Disclosure Provisions
 Marginal note: No civil or criminal liability incurred by informants
 462.47  For greater certainty but subject to section 241 of the Income Tax Act , a person is justified in disclosing to a peace officer or the Attorney General any facts on the basis of which that person reasonably suspects that any property is proceeds of crime or that any person has committed or is about to commit a designated offence.
 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1996, c. 19, s. 70
 2001, c. 32, ss. 25, 82
 2002, c. 13, s. 16(F)
 2004, c. 12, s. 8(F)

 Marginal note: Definition of “designated substance offence”
 462.48   (1)  In this section, designated substance offence means
 (a)  an offence under Part I of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act , except subsection 4(1) of that Act; or

 (b)  a conspiracy or an attempt to commit, being an accessory after the fact in relation to, or any counselling in relation to, an offence referred to in paragraph (a).

 Marginal note: Disclosure of income tax information
 (1.1)  The Attorney General may make an application in accordance with subsection (2) for an order for disclosure of information under subsection (3), for the purposes of an investigation in relation to
 (a)  a designated substance offence;

 (b)  an offence against section 354 or 462.31 where the offence is alleged to have been committed in relation to any property, thing or proceeds obtained or derived directly or indirectly as a result of
 (i)  the commission in Canada of a designated substance offence, or

 (ii)  an act or omission anywhere that, if it had occurred in Canada, would have constituted a designated substance offence;

 (c)  an offence against section 467.11, 467.12 or 467.13 or a conspiracy or an attempt to commit, or being an accessory after the fact in relation to, such an offence; or

 (d)  a terrorism offence.

 Marginal note: Application
 (2)  An application under subsection (1.1) shall be made ex parte in writing to a judge and be accompanied by an affidavit sworn on the information and belief of the Attorney General or a person specially designated by the Attorney General for that purpose deposing to the following matters, namely,
 (a)  the offence or matter under investigation;

 (b)  the person in relation to whom the information or documents referred to in paragraph (c) are required;

 (c)  the type of information or book, record, writing, return or other document obtained by or on behalf of the Minister of National Revenue for the purposes of the Income Tax Act to which access is sought or that is proposed to be examined or communicated; and

 (d)  the facts relied on to justify the belief, on reasonable grounds, that the person referred to in paragraph (b) has committed or benefited from the commission of an offence referred to in paragraph (1.1)(a), (b) or (c) and that the information or documents referred to in paragraph (c) are likely to be of substantial value, whether alone or together with other material, to the investigation for the purposes of which the application is made.

 Marginal note: Order for disclosure of information
 (3)  Where the judge to whom an application under subsection (1.1) is made is satisfied
 (a)  of the matters referred to in paragraph (2)(d), and

 (b)  that there are reasonable grounds for believing that it is in the public interest to allow access to the information or documents to which the application relates, having regard to the benefit likely to accrue to the investigation if the access is obtained,

 the judge may, subject to any conditions that the judge considers advisable in the public interest, order the 
Commissioner of Revenue or any person specially designated in writing by the Commissioner for the purposes of this section
 (c)  to allow a police officer named in the order access to all such information and documents and to examine them, or

 (d)  where the judge considers it necessary in the circumstances, to produce all such information and documents to the police officer and allow the police officer to remove the information and documents,

 within such period after the expiration of seven clear days following the service of the order pursuant to subsection (4) as the judge may specify.

 Marginal note: Service of order
 (4)  A copy of an order made by a judge under subsection (3) shall be served on the person to whom the order is addressed in such manner as the judge directs or as may be prescribed by rules of court.

 Marginal note: Extension of period for compliance with order
 (5)  A judge who makes an order under subsection (3) may, on application of the Minister of National Revenue, extend the period within which the order is to be complied with.

 Marginal note: Objection to disclosure of information
 (6)  The Minister of National Revenue or any person specially designated in writing by that Minister for the purposes of this section may object to the disclosure of any information or document in respect of which an order under subsection (3) has been made by certifying orally or in writing that the information or document should not be disclosed on the ground that
 (a)  the Minister of National Revenue is prohibited from disclosing the information or document by any bilateral or international treaty, convention or other agreement respecting taxation to which the Government of Canada is a signatory;

 (b)  a privilege is attached by law to the information or document;

 (c)  the information or document has been placed in a sealed package pursuant to law or an order of a court of competent jurisdiction; or

 (d)  disclosure of the information or document would not, for any other reason, be in the public interest.

 Marginal note: Determination of objection
 (7)  Where an objection to the disclosure of information or a document is made under subsection (6), the objection may be determined, on application, in accordance with subsection (8), by the Chief Justice of the Federal Court, or by such other judge of that Court as the Chief Justice may designate to hear such applications.

 Marginal note: Judge may examine information
 (8)  A judge who is to determine an objection pursuant to subsection (7) may, if the judge considers it necessary to determine the objection, examine the information or document in relation to which the objection is made and shall grant the objection and order that disclosure of the information or document be refused where the judge is satisfied of any of the grounds mentioned in subsection (6).

 Marginal note: Limitation period
 (9)  An application under subsection (7) shall be made within ten days after the objection is made or within such greater or lesser period as the Chief Justice of the Federal Court, or such other judge of that Court as the Chief Justice may designate to hear such applications, considers appropriate.

 Marginal note: Appeal to Federal Court of Appeal
 (10)  An appeal lies from a determination under subsection (7) to the Federal Court of Appeal.

 Marginal note: Limitation period for appeal
 (11)  An appeal under subsection (10) shall be brought within ten days from the date of the determination appealed from or within such further time as the Federal Court of Appeal considers appropriate in the circumstances.

 Marginal note: Special rules for hearings
 (12)  An application under subsection (7) or an appeal brought in respect of that application shall
 (a)  be heard in camera ; and

 (b)  on the request of the person objecting to the disclosure of information, be heard and determined in the National Capital Region described in the schedule to the National Capital Act .

 Marginal note: Ex parte representations
 (13)  During the hearing of an application under subsection (7) or an appeal brought in respect of that application, the person who made the objection in respect of which the application was made or the appeal was brought shall, on the request of that person, be given the opportunity to make representations ex parte .

 Marginal note: Copies
 (14)  When any information or document is examined or provided under subsection (3), the person by whom it is examined or to whom it is provided or any officer of the Canada Revenue Agency may make, or cause to be made, one or more copies of it, and any copy purporting to be certified by the Minister of National Revenue or an authorized person to be a copy made under this subsection is evidence of the nature and content of the original information or document and has the same probative force as the original information or document would have had if it had been proved in the ordinary way.

 Marginal note: Further disclosure
 (15)  No person to whom information or documents have been disclosed or provided pursuant to this subsection or pursuant to an order made under subsection (3) shall further disclose the information or documents except for the purposes of the investigation in relation to which the order was made.

 Marginal note: Form
 (16)  An order made under subsection (3) may be in Form 47.

 Marginal note: Definition of “police officer”
 (17)  In this section, police officer means any officer, constable or other person employed for the preservation and maintenance of the public peace.

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1994, c. 13, s. 7
 1996, c. 19, s. 70
 1997, c. 23, s. 10
 1999, c. 17, s. 120
 2001, c. 32, s. 26, c. 41, ss. 15, 133
 2005, c. 38, ss. 138, 140

 Specific Rules of Forfeiture
 Marginal note: Specific forfeiture provisions unaffected by this Part
 462.49   (1)  This Part does not affect the operation of any other provision of this or any other Act of Parliament respecting the forfeiture of property.

 Marginal note: Priority for restitution to victims of crime
 (2)  The property of an offender may be used to satisfy the operation of a provision of this or any other Act of Parliament respecting the forfeiture of property only to the extent that it is not required to satisfy the operation of any other provision of this or any other Act of Parliament respecting restitution to or compensation of persons affected by the commission of offences.

 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2

 Regulations
 Marginal note: Regulations
 462.5  The Attorney General may make regulations governing the manner of disposing of or otherwise dealing with, in accordance with the law, property forfeited under this Part.
 R.S., 1985, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 2

 PART XIII Attempts — Conspiracies — Accessories
 Marginal note: Attempts, accessories
 463  Except where otherwise expressly provided by law, the following provisions apply in respect of persons who attempt to commit or are accessories after the fact to the commission of offences:
 (a)  every one who attempts to commit or is an accessory after the fact to the commission of an indictable offence for which, on conviction, an accused is liable to be sentenced to imprisonment for life is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years;

 (b)  every one who attempts to commit or is an accessory after the fact to the commission of an indictable offence for which, on conviction, an accused is liable to imprisonment for fourteen years or less is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term that is one-half of the longest term to which a person who is guilty of that offence is liable;

 (c)  every one who attempts to commit or is an accessory after the fact to the commission of an offence punishable on summary conviction is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction; and

 (d)  every one who attempts to commit or is an accessory after the fact to the commission of an offence for which the offender may be prosecuted by indictment or for which he is punishable on summary conviction
 (i)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding a term that is one-half of the longest term to which a person who is guilty of that offence is liable, or

 (ii)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 463
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 59
 1998, c. 35, s. 120

 Marginal note: Counselling offence that is not committed
 464  Except where otherwise expressly provided by law, the following provisions apply in respect of persons who counsel other persons to commit offences, namely,
 (a)  every one who counsels another person to commit an indictable offence is, if the offence is not committed, guilty of an indictable offence and liable to the same punishment to which a person who attempts to commit that offence is liable; and

 (b)  every one who counsels another person to commit an offence punishable on summary conviction is, if the offence is not committed, guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 464
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 60

 Marginal note: Conspiracy
 465   (1)  Except where otherwise expressly provided by law, the following provisions apply in respect of conspiracy:
 (a)  every one who conspires with any one to commit murder or to cause another person to be murdered, whether in Canada or not, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to a maximum term of imprisonment for life;

 (b)  every one who conspires with any one to prosecute a person for an alleged offence, knowing that he did not commit that offence, is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
 (i)  to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, if the alleged offence is one for which, on conviction, that person would be liable to be sentenced to imprisonment for life or for a term not exceeding fourteen years, or

 (ii)  to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, if the alleged offence is one for which, on conviction, that person would be liable to imprisonment for less than fourteen years;

 (c)  every one who conspires with any one to commit an indictable offence not provided for in paragraph (a) or (b) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to the same punishment as that to which an accused who is guilty of that offence would, on conviction, be liable; and

 (d)  every one who conspires with any one to commit an offence punishable on summary conviction is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 (2)   [Repealed, 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 61]

 Marginal note: Conspiracy to commit offences
 (3)  Every one who, while in Canada, conspires with any one to do anything referred to in subsection (1) in a place outside Canada that is an offence under the laws of that place shall be deemed to have conspired to do that thing in Canada.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (4)  Every one who, while in a place outside Canada, conspires with any one to do anything referred to in subsection (1) in Canada shall be deemed to have conspired in Canada to do that thing.

 Marginal note: Jurisdiction
 (5)  Where a person is alleged to have conspired to do anything that is an offence by virtue of subsection (3) or (4), proceedings in respect of that offence may, whether or not that person is in Canada, be commenced in any territorial division in Canada, and the accused may be tried and punished in respect of that offence in the same manner as if the offence had been committed in that territorial division.

 Marginal note: Appearance of accused at trial
 (6)  For greater certainty, the provisions of this Act relating to
 (a)  requirements that an accused appear at and be present during proceedings, and

 (b)  the exceptions to those requirements,

 apply to proceedings commenced in any territorial division pursuant to subsection (5).

 Marginal note: Where previously tried outside Canada
 (7)  Where a person is alleged to have conspired to do anything that is an offence by virtue of subsection (3) or (4) and that person has been tried and dealt with outside Canada in respect of the offence in such a manner that, if the person had been tried and dealt with in Canada, he would be able to plead autrefois acquit , autrefois convict or pardon, the person shall be deemed to have been so tried and dealt with in Canada.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 465
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 61
 1998, c. 35, s. 121

 Marginal note: Conspiracy in restraint of trade
 466   (1)  A conspiracy in restraint of trade is an agreement between two or more persons to do or to procure to be done any unlawful act in restraint of trade.

 Marginal note: Trade union, exception
 (2)  The purposes of a trade union are not, by reason only that they are in restraint of trade, unlawful within the meaning of subsection (1).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 466
 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F)

 Marginal note: Saving
 467   (1)  No person shall be convicted of the offence of conspiracy by reason only that he
 (a)  refuses to work with a workman or for an employer; or

 (b)  does any act or causes any act to be done for the purpose of a trade combination, unless that act is an offence expressly punishable by law.

 Definition of trade combination
 (2)  In this section, trade combination means any combination between masters or workmen or other persons for the purpose of regulating or altering the relations between masters or workmen, or the conduct of a master or workman in or in respect of his business, employment or contract of employment or service.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 425

 Marginal note: Definitions
 467.1   (1)  The following definitions apply in this Act.
 criminal organization
 organisation criminelle
 criminal organization means a group, however organized, that
 (a)  is composed of three or more persons in or outside Canada; and

 (b)  has as one of its main purposes or main activities the facilitation or commission of one or more serious offences that, if committed, would likely result in the direct or indirect receipt of a material benefit, including a financial benefit, by the group or by any of the persons who constitute the group.

 It does not include a group of persons that forms randomly for the immediate commission of a single offence. ( organisation criminelle )
 serious offence
 infraction grave
 serious offence means an indictable offence under this or any other Act of Parliament for which the maximum punishment is imprisonment for five years or more, or another offence that is prescribed by regulation. ( infraction grave )

 Marginal note: Facilitation
 (2)  For the purposes of this section and section 467.11, facilitation of an offence does not require knowledge of a particular offence the commission of which is facilitated, or that an offence actually be committed.

 Marginal note: Commission of offence
 (3)  In this section and in sections 467.11 to 467.13, committing an offence means being a party to it or counselling any person to be a party to it.

 Marginal note: Regulations
 (4)  The Governor in Council may make regulations prescribing offences that are included in the definition serious offence in subsection (1).

 1997, c. 23, s. 11
 2001, c. 32, s. 27

 Marginal note: Participation in activities of criminal organization
 467.11   (1)  Every person who, for the purpose of enhancing the ability of a criminal organization to facilitate or commit an indictable offence under this or any other Act of Parliament, knowingly, by act or omission, participates in or contributes to any activity of the criminal organization is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 Marginal note: Prosecution
 (2)  In a prosecution for an offence under subsection (1), it is not necessary for the prosecutor to prove that
 (a)  the criminal organization actually facilitated or committed an indictable offence;

 (b)  the participation or contribution of the accused actually enhanced the ability of the criminal organization to facilitate or commit an indictable offence;

 (c)  the accused knew the specific nature of any indictable offence that may have been facilitated or committed by the criminal organization; or

 (d)  the accused knew the identity of any of the persons who constitute the criminal organization.

 Marginal note: Factors
 (3)  In determining whether an accused participates in or contributes to any activity of a criminal organization, the Court may consider, among other factors, whether the accused
 (a)  uses a name, word, symbol or other representation that identifies, or is associated with, the criminal organization;

 (b)  frequently associates with any of the persons who constitute the criminal organization;

 (c)  receives any benefit from the criminal organization; or

 (d)  repeatedly engages in activities at the instruction of any of the persons who constitute the criminal organization.

 2001, c. 32, s. 27

 Marginal note: Commission of offence for criminal organization
 467.12   (1)  Every person who commits an indictable offence under this or any other Act of Parliament for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with, a criminal organization is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

 Marginal note: Prosecution
 (2)  In a prosecution for an offence under subsection (1), it is not necessary for the prosecutor to prove that the accused knew the identity of any of the persons who constitute the criminal organization.

 2001, c. 32, s. 27

 Marginal note: Instructing commission of offence for criminal organization
 467.13   (1)  Every person who is one of the persons who constitute a criminal organization and who knowingly instructs, directly or indirectly, any person to commit an offence under this or any other Act of Parliament for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with, the criminal organization is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for life.

 Marginal note: Prosecution
 (2)  In a prosecution for an offence under subsection (1), it is not necessary for the prosecutor to prove that
 (a)  an offence other than the offence under subsection (1) was actually committed;

 (b)  the accused instructed a particular person to commit an offence; or

 (c)  the accused knew the identity of all of the persons who constitute the criminal organization.

 2001, c. 32, s. 27

 Marginal note: Sentences to be served consecutively
 467.14  A sentence imposed on a person for an offence under section 467.11, 467.12 or 467.13 shall be served consecutively to any other punishment imposed on the person for an offence arising out of the same event or series of events and to any other sentence to which the person is subject at the time the sentence is imposed on the person for an offence under any of those sections.
 2001, c. 32, s. 27

 Marginal note: Powers of the Attorney General of Canada
 467.2   (1)  Notwithstanding the definition of Attorney General in section 2, the Attorney General of Canada may conduct proceedings in respect of
 (a)  an offence under section 467.11; or

 (b)  another criminal organization offence where the alleged offence arises out of conduct that in whole or in part is in relation to an alleged contravention of an Act of Parliament or a regulation made under such an Act, other than this Act or a regulation made under this Act.

 For those purposes, the Attorney General of Canada may exercise all the powers and perform all the duties and functions assigned to the Attorney General by or under this Act.

 Marginal note: Powers of the Attorney General of a province
 (2)  Subsection (1) does not affect the authority of the Attorney General of a province to conduct proceedings in respect of an offence referred to in section 467.11, 467.12 or 467.13 or to exercise any of the powers or perform any of the duties and functions assigned to the Attorney General by or under this Act.

 1997, c. 23, s. 11
 2001, c. 32, s. 28

 PART XIV Jurisdiction
 General
 Marginal note: Superior court of criminal jurisdiction
 468  Every superior court of criminal jurisdiction has jurisdiction to try any indictable offence.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 426

 Marginal note: Court of criminal jurisdiction
 469  Every court of criminal jurisdiction has jurisdiction to try an indictable offence other than
 (a)  an offence under any of the following sections:
 (i)  section 47 (treason),

 (ii)  section 49 (alarming Her Majesty),

 (iii)  section 51 (intimidating Parliament or a legislature),

 (iv)  section 53 (inciting to mutiny),

 (v)  section 61 (seditious offences),

 (vi)  section 74 (piracy),

 (vii)  section 75 (piratical acts), or

 (viii)  section 235 (murder);

 Marginal note: Accessories
 (b)  the offence of being an accessory after the fact to high treason or treason or murder;

 (c)  an offence under section 119 (bribery) by the holder of a judicial office;

 Marginal note: Crimes against humanity
 (c.1)  an offence under any of sections 4 to 7 of the Crimes Against Humanity and War Crimes Act ;

 Marginal note: Attempts
 (d)  the offence of attempting to commit any offence mentioned in subparagraphs (a)(i) to (vii); or

 Marginal note: Conspiracy
 (e)  the offence of conspiring to commit any offence mentioned in paragraph (a).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 469
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 62
 2000, c. 24, s. 44

 Marginal note: Jurisdiction over person
 470  Subject to this Act, every superior court of criminal jurisdiction and every court of criminal jurisdiction that has power to try an indictable offence is competent to try an accused for that offence
 (a)  if the accused is found, is arrested or is in custody within the territorial jurisdiction of the court; or

 (b)  if the accused has been ordered to be tried by
 (i)  that court, or

 (ii)  any other court, the jurisdiction of which has by lawful authority been transferred to that court.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 470
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 101

 Marginal note: Trial by jury compulsory
 471  Except where otherwise expressly provided by law, every accused who is charged with an indictable offence shall be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 429

 472   [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 63]
 Marginal note: Trial without jury
 473   (1)  Notwithstanding anything in this Act, an accused charged with an offence listed in section 469 may, with the consent of the accused and the Attorney General, be tried without a jury by a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction.

 Marginal note: Joinder of other offences
 (1.1)  Where the consent of the accused and the Attorney General is given in accordance with subsection (1), the judge of the superior court of criminal jurisdiction may order that any offence be tried by that judge in conjunction with the offence listed in section 469.

 Marginal note: Withdrawal of consent
 (2)  Notwithstanding anything in this Act, where the consent of an accused and the Attorney General is given in accordance with subsection (1), that consent shall not be withdrawn unless both the accused and the Attorney General agree to the withdrawal.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 473
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 63
 1994, c. 44, s. 30

 Marginal note: Adjournment when no jury summoned
 474   (1)  Where the competent authority has determined that a panel of jurors is not to be summoned for a term or sittings of the court for the trial of criminal cases in any territorial division, the clerk of the court may, on the day of the opening of the term or sittings, if a judge is not present to preside over the court, adjourn the court and the business of the court to a subsequent day.

 Marginal note: Adjournment on instructions of judge
 (2)  A clerk of the court for the trial of criminal cases in any territorial division may, at any time, on the instructions of the presiding judge or another judge of the court, adjourn the court and the business of the court to a subsequent day.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 474
 1994, c. 44, s. 31

 Marginal note: Accused absconding during trial
 475   (1)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, where an accused, whether or not he is charged jointly with another, absconds during the course of his trial,
 (a)  he shall be deemed to have waived his right to be present at his trial, and

 (b)  the court may
 (i)  continue the trial and proceed to a judgment or verdict and, if it finds the accused guilty, impose a sentence on him in his absence, or

 (ii)  if a warrant in Form 7 is issued for the arrest of the accused, adjourn the trial to await his appearance,

 but where the trial is adjourned pursuant to subparagraph (b)(ii), the court may, at any time, continue the trial if it is satisfied that it is no longer in the interests of justice to await the appearance of the accused.

 Marginal note: Adverse inference
 (2)  Where a court continues a trial pursuant to subsection (1), it may draw an inference adverse to the accused from the fact that he has absconded.

 Marginal note: Accused not entitled to re-opening
 (3)  Where an accused reappears at his trial that is continuing pursuant to subsection (1), he is not entitled to have any part of the proceedings that was conducted in his absence re-opened unless the court is satisfied that because of exceptional circumstances it is in the interests of justice to re-open the proceedings.

 Marginal note: Counsel for accused may continue to act
 (4)  Where an accused has absconded during the course of his trial and the court continues the trial, counsel for the accused is not thereby deprived of any authority he may have to continue to act for the accused in the proceedings.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 475
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 185(F), c. 1 (4th Supp.), s. 18(F)

 Special Jurisdiction
 Marginal note: Special jurisdictions
 476  For the purposes of this Act,
 (a)  where an offence is committed in or on any water or on a bridge between two or more territorial divisions, the offence shall be deemed to have been committed in any of the territorial divisions;

 (b)  where an offence is committed on the boundary of two or more territorial divisions or within five hundred metres of any such boundary, or the offence was commenced within one territorial division and completed within another, the offence shall be deemed to have been committed in any of the territorial divisions;

 (c)  where an offence is committed in or on a vehicle employed in a journey, or on board a vessel employed on a navigable river, canal or inland water, the offence shall be deemed to have been committed in any territorial division through which the vehicle or vessel passed in the course of the journey or voyage on which the offence was committed, and where the center or other part of the road, or navigable river, canal or inland water on which the vehicle or vessel passed in the course of the journey or voyage is the boundary of two or more territorial divisions, the offence shall be deemed to have been committed in any of the territorial divisions;

 (d)  where an offence is committed in an aircraft in the course of a flight of that aircraft, it shall be deemed to have been committed
 (i)  in the territorial division in which the flight commenced,

 (ii)  in any territorial division over which the aircraft passed in the course of the flight, or

 (iii)  in the territorial division in which the flight ended; and

 (e)  where an offence is committed in respect of the mail in the course of its door-to-door delivery, the offence shall be deemed to have been committed in any territorial division through which the mail was carried on that delivery.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 476
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 186
 1992, c. 1, s. 58

 Definition of ship
 477   (1)  In sections 477.1 to 477.4, ship includes any description of vessel, boat or craft designed, used or capable of being used solely or partly for marine navigation, without regard to method or lack of propulsion.

 Marginal note: Saving
 (2)  Nothing in sections 477.1 to 477.4 limits the operation of any other Act of Parliament or the jurisdiction that a court may exercise apart from those sections.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 477
 1990, c. 44, s. 15
 1996, c. 31, s. 67

 Marginal note: Offences outside of Canada
 477.1  Every person who commits an act or omission that, if it occurred in Canada, would be an offence under a federal law, within the meaning of section 2 of the Oceans Act , is deemed to have committed that act or omission in Canada if it is an act or omission
 (a)  in the exclusive economic zone of Canada that
 (i)  is committed by a person who is in the exclusive economic zone of Canada in connection with exploring or exploiting, conserving or managing the natural resources, whether living or non-living, of the exclusive economic zone of Canada, and

 (ii)  is committed by or in relation to a person who is a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act ;

 (b)  that is committed in a place in or above the continental shelf of Canada and that is an offence in that place by virtue of section 20 of the Oceans Act ;

 (c)  that is committed outside Canada on board or by means of a ship registered or licensed, or for which an identification number has been issued, pursuant to any Act of Parliament;

 (d)  that is committed outside Canada in the course of hot pursuit; or

 (e)  that is committed outside the territory of any state by a Canadian citizen.

 1990, c. 44, s. 15
 1996, c. 31, s. 68
 2001, c. 27, s. 247

 Marginal note: Consent of Attorney General of Canada
 477.2   (1)  No proceedings in respect of an offence committed in or on the territorial sea of Canada shall be continued unless the consent of the Attorney General of Canada is obtained not later than eight days after the proceedings are commenced, if the accused is not a Canadian citizen and the offence is alleged to have been committed on board any ship registered outside Canada.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (1.1)  Subsection (1) does not apply to proceedings by way of summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Consent of Attorney General of Canada
 (2)  No proceedings in respect of which courts have jurisdiction by virtue only of paragraph 477.1(a) or (b) shall be continued unless the consent of the Attorney General of Canada is obtained not later than eight days after the proceedings are commenced, if the accused is not a Canadian citizen and the offence is alleged to have been committed on board any ship registered outside Canada.

 Marginal note: Consent of Attorney General of Canada
 (3)  No proceedings in respect of which courts have jurisdiction by virtue only of paragraph 477.1(d) or (e) shall be continued unless the consent of the Attorney General of Canada is obtained not later than eight days after the proceedings are commenced.

 Marginal note: Consent to be filed
 (4)  The consent of the Attorney General required by subsection (1), (2) or (3) must be filed with the clerk of the court in which the proceedings have been instituted.

 1990, c. 44, s. 15
 1994, c. 44, s. 32
 1996, c. 31, s. 69

 Marginal note: Exercising powers of arrest, entry, etc.
 477.3   (1)  Every power of arrest, entry, search or seizure or other power that could be exercised in Canada in respect of an act or omission referred to in section 477.1 may be exercised, in the circumstances referred to in that section,
 (a)  at the place or on board the ship or marine installation or structure, within the meaning of section 2 of the Oceans Act , where the act or omission occurred; or

 (b)  where hot pursuit has been commenced, at any place on the seas, other than a place that is part of the territorial sea of any other state.

 Marginal note: Arrest, search, seizure, etc.
 (2)  A justice or judge in any territorial division in Canada has jurisdiction to authorize an arrest, entry, search or seizure or an investigation or other ancillary matter related to an offence
 (a)  committed in or on the territorial sea of Canada or any area of the sea that forms part of the internal waters of Canada, or

 (b)  referred to in section 477.1

 in the same manner as if the offence had been committed in that territorial division.

 Marginal note: Limitation
 (3)  Where an act or omission that is an offence by virtue only of section 477.1 is alleged to have been committed on board any ship registered outside Canada, the powers referred to in subsection (1) shall not be exercised outside Canada with respect to that act or omission without the consent of the Attorney General of Canada.

 1990, c. 44, s. 15
 1996, c. 31, s. 70

 477.4   (1) and (2)   [Repealed, 1996, c. 31, s. 71]

 Marginal note: Evidence
 (3)  In proceedings in respect of an offence,
 (a)  a certificate referred to in subsection 23(1) of the Oceans Act , or

 (b)  a certificate issued by or under the authority of the Minister of Foreign Affairs containing a statement that any geographical location specified in the certificate was, at any time material to the proceedings, in an area of a fishing zone of Canada that is not within the internal waters of Canada or the territorial sea of Canada or outside the territory of any state,

 is conclusive proof of the truth of the statement without proof of the signature or official character of the person appearing to have issued the certificate.

 Marginal note: Certificate cannot be compelled
 (4)  A certificate referred to in subsection (3) is admissible in evidence in proceedings referred to in that subsection but its production cannot be compelled.

 1990, c. 44, s. 15
 1995, c. 5, s. 25
 1996, c. 31, s. 71

 Marginal note: Offence committed entirely in one province
 478   (1)  Subject to this Act, a court in a province shall not try an offence committed entirely in another province.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (2)  Every proprietor, publisher, editor or other person charged with the publication of a defamatory libel in a newspaper or with conspiracy to publish a defamatory libel in a newspaper shall be dealt with, indicted, tried and punished in the province where he resides or in which the newspaper is printed.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (3)  An accused who is charged with an offence that is alleged to have been committed in Canada outside the province in which the accused is may, if the offence is not an offence mentioned in section 469 and
 (a)  in the case of proceedings instituted at the instance of the Government of Canada and conducted by or on behalf of that Government, if the Attorney General of Canada consents, or

 (b)  in any other case, if the Attorney General of the province where the offence is alleged to have been committed consents,

 appear before a court or judge that would have had jurisdiction to try that offence if it had been committed in the province where the accused is, and where the accused consents to plead guilty and pleads guilty to that offence, the court or judge shall determine the accused to be guilty of the offence and impose the punishment warranted by law, but where the accused does not consent to plead guilty and does not plead guilty, the accused shall, if the accused was in custody prior to appearance, be returned to custody and shall be dealt with according to law.

 Marginal note: Where accused ordered to stand trial
 (4)  Notwithstanding that an accused described in subsection (3) has been ordered to stand trial or that an indictment has been preferred against the accused in respect of the offence to which he desires to plead guilty, the accused shall be deemed simply to stand charged of that offence without a preliminary inquiry having been conducted or an indictment having been preferred with respect thereto.

 Definition of newspaper
 (5)  In this section, newspaper has the same meaning as in section 297.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 478
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), ss. 64, 101(E)
 1994, c. 44, s. 33(E)

 Marginal note: Offence outstanding in same province
 479  Where an accused is charged with an offence that is alleged to have been committed in the province in which he is, he may, if the offence is not an offence mentioned in section 469 and
 (a)  in the case of proceedings instituted at the instance of the Government of Canada and conducted by or on behalf of that Government, the Attorney General of Canada consents, or

 (b)  in any other case, the Attorney General of the province where the offence is alleged to have been committed consents,

 appear before a court or judge that would have had jurisdiction to try that offence if it had been committed in the place where the accused is, and where the accused consents to plead guilty and pleads guilty to that offence, the court or judge shall determine the accused to be guilty of the offence and impose the punishment warranted by law, but where the accused does not consent to plead guilty and does not plead guilty, the accused shall, if the accused was in custody prior to appearance, be returned to custody and shall be dealt with according to law.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 479
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 65
 1994, c. 44, s. 34(E)

 Marginal note: Offence in unorganized territory
 480   (1)  Where an offence is committed in an unorganized tract of country in any province or on a lake, river or other water therein, not included in a territorial division or in a provisional judicial district, proceedings in respect thereof may be commenced and an accused may be charged, tried and punished in respect thereof within any territorial division or provisional judicial district of the province in the same manner as if the offence had been committed within that territorial division or provisional judicial district.

 Marginal note: New territorial division
 (2)  Where a provisional judicial district or a new territorial division is constituted in an unorganized tract referred to in subsection (1), the jurisdiction conferred by that subsection continues until appropriate provision is made by law for the administration of criminal justice within the provisional judicial district or new territorial division.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 436

 Marginal note: Offence not in a province
 481  Where an offence is committed in a part of Canada not in a province, proceedings in respect thereof may be commenced and the accused may be charged, tried and punished within any territorial division in any province in the same manner as if that offence had been committed in that territorial division.
 R.S., c. C-34, s. 437

 Marginal note: Offence in Canadian waters
 481.1  Where an offence is committed in or on the territorial sea of Canada or any area of the sea that forms part of the internal waters of Canada, proceedings in respect thereof may, whether or not the accused is in Canada, be commenced and an accused may be charged, tried and punished within any territorial division in Canada in the same manner as if the offence had been committed in that territorial division.
 1996, c. 31, s. 72

 Marginal note: Offence outside Canada
 481.2  Subject to this or any other Act of Parliament, where an act or omission is committed outside Canada and the act or omission, when committed in those circumstances, is an offence under this or any other Act of Parliament, proceedings in respect thereof may, whether or not the accused is in Canada, be commenced, and an accused may be charged, tried and punished within any territorial division in Canada in the same manner as if the offence had been committed in that territorial division.
 1996, c. 31, s. 72

 Marginal note: Appearance of accused at trial
 481.3  For greater certainty, the provisions of this Act relating to
 (a)  the requirement of the appearance of an accused at proceedings, and

 (b)  the exceptions to that requirement

 apply to proceedings commenced in any territorial division pursuant to section 481, 481.1 or 481.2.
 1996, c. 31, s. 72

 Rules of Court
 Marginal note: Power to make rules
 482   (1)  Every superior court of criminal jurisdiction and every court of appeal may make rules of court not inconsistent with this or any other Act of Parliament, and any rules so made apply to any prosecution, proceeding, action or appeal, as the case may be, within the jurisdiction of that court, instituted in relation to any matter of a criminal nature or arising from or incidental to any such prosecution, proceeding, action or appeal.

 Marginal note: Power to make rules
 (2)  The following courts may, subject to the approval of the lieutenant governor in council of the relevant province, make rules of court not inconsistent with this Act or any other Act of Parliament that are applicable to any prosecution, proceeding, including a preliminary inquiry or proceedings within the meaning of Part XXVII, action or appeal, as the case may be, within the jurisdiction of that court, instituted in relation to any matter of a criminal nature or arising from or incidental to the prosecution, proceeding, action or appeal:
 (a)  every court of criminal jurisdiction for a province;

 (b)  every appeal court within the meaning of section 812 that is not a court referred to in subsection (1);

 (c)  the Ontario Court of Justice;

 (d)  the Court of Quebec and every municipal court in the Province of Quebec;

 (e)  the Provincial Court of Nova Scotia;

 (f)  the Provincial Court of New Brunswick;

 (g)  the Provincial Court of Manitoba;

 (h)  the Provincial Court of British Columbia;

 (i)  the Provincial Court of Prince Edward Island;

 (j)  the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan;

 (k)  the Provincial Court of Alberta;

 (l)  the Provincial Court of Newfoundland;

 (m)  the Territorial Court of Yukon;

 (n)  the Territorial Court of the Northwest Territories; and

 (o)  the Nunavut Court of Justice.

 Marginal note: Purpose of rules
 (3)  Rules under subsection (1) or (2) may be made
 (a)  generally to regulate the duties of the officers of the court and any other matter considered expedient to attain the ends of justice and carry into effect the provisions of the law;

 (b)  to regulate the sittings of the court or any division thereof, or of any judge of the court sitting in chambers, except in so far as they are regulated by law;

 (c)  to regulate the pleading, practice and procedure in criminal matters, including pre-hearing conferences held under section 625.1, proceedings with respect to judicial interim release and preliminary inquiries and, in the case of rules under subsection (1), proceedings with respect to mandamus , certiorari , habeas corpus , prohibition and procedendo and proceedings on an appeal under section 830; and

 (d)  to carry out the provisions of this Act relating to appeals from conviction, acquittal or sentence and, without restricting the generality of this paragraph,
 (i)  for furnishing necessary forms and instructions in relation to notices of appeal or applications for leave to appeal to officials or other persons requiring or demanding them,

 (ii)  for ensuring the accuracy of notes taken at a trial and the verification of any copy or transcript,

 (iii)  for keeping writings, exhibits or other things connected with the proceedings on the trial,

 (iv)  for securing the safe custody of property during the period in which the operation of an order with respect to that property is suspended under subsection 689(1), and

 (v)  for providing that the Attorney General and counsel who acted for the Attorney General at the trial be supplied with certified copies of writings, exhibits and things connected with the proceedings that are required for the purposes of their duties.

 Marginal note: Publication
 (4)  Rules of court that are made under the authority of this section shall be published in the Canada Gazette .

 Marginal note: Regulations to secure uniformity
 (5)  Notwithstanding anything in this section, the Governor in Council may make such provision as he considers proper to secure uniformity in the rules of court in criminal matters, and all uniform rules made under the authority of this subsection prevail and have effect as if enacted by this Act.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 482
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 66
 1994, c. 44, s. 35
 2002, c. 13, s. 17

 Marginal note: Power to make rules respecting case management
 482.1   (1)  A court referred to in subsection 482(1) or (2) may make rules for case management, including rules
 (a)  for the determination of any matter that would assist the court in effective and efficient case management;

 (b)  permitting personnel of the court to deal with administrative matters relating to proceedings out of court if the accused is represented by counsel; and

 (c)  establishing case management schedules.

 Marginal note: Compliance with directions
 (2)  The parties to a case shall comply with any direction made in accordance with a rule made under subsection (1).

 Marginal note: Summons or warrant
 (3)  If rules are made under subsection (1), a court, justice or judge may issue a summons or warrant to compel the presence of the accused at case management proceedings.

 Marginal note: Provisions to apply
 (4)  Section 512 and subsection 524(1) apply, with any modifications that the circumstances require, to the issuance of a summons or a warrant under subsection (3).

 Marginal note: Approval of lieutenant governor in council
 (5)  Rules made under this section by a court referred to in subsection 482(2) must be approved by the lieutenant governor in council of the relevant province in order to come into force.

 Marginal note: Subsections 482(4) and (5) to apply
 (6)  Subsections 482(4) and (5) apply, with any modifications that the circumstances require, to rules made under subsection (1).

 2002, c. 13, s. 18

 PART XV Special Procedure and Powers
 General Powers of Certain Officials
 Marginal note: Officials with powers of two justices
 483  Every judge or provincial court judge authorized by the law of the province in which he is appointed to do anything that is required to be done by two or more justices may do alone anything that this Act or any other Act of Parliament authorizes two or more justices to do.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 483
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 203

 Marginal note: Preserving order in court
 484  Every judge or provincial court judge has the same power and authority to preserve order in a court over which he presides as may be exercised by the superior court of criminal jurisdiction of the province during the sittings thereof.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 484
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 203

 Marginal note: Procedural irregularities
 485   (1)  Jurisdiction over an offence is not lost by reason of the failure of any court, judge, provincial court judge or justice to act in the exercise of that jurisdiction at any particular time, or by reason of a failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Act respecting adjournments or remands.

 Marginal note: When accused not present
 (1.1)  Jurisdiction over an accused is not lost by reason of the failure of the accused to appear personally, so long as subsection 515(2.2), paragraph 537(1)(j), (j.1) or (k), subsection 650(1.1) or (1.2), paragraph 650(2)(b) or 650.01(3)(a), subsection 683(2.1) or 688(2.1) or a rule of court made under section 482 or 482.1 applies.

 Marginal note: Summons or warrant
 (2)  Where jurisdiction over an accused or a defendant is lost and has not been regained, a court, judge, provincial court judge or justice may, within three months after the loss of jurisdiction, issue a summons, or if it or he considers it necessary in the public interest, a warrant for the arrest of the accused or defendant.

 Marginal note: Dismissal for want of prosecution
 (3)  Where no summons or warrant is issued under subsection (2) within the period provided therein, the proceedings shall be deemed to be dismissed for want of prosecution and shall not be recommenced except in accordance with section 485.1.

 Marginal note: Adjournment and order
 (4)  Where, in the opinion of the court, judge, provincial court judge or justice, an accused or a defendant who appears at a proceeding has been misled or prejudiced by reason of any matter referred to in subsection (1), the court, judge, provincial court judge or justice may adjourn the proceeding and may make such order as it or he considers appropriate.

 Marginal note: Part XVI to apply
 (5)  The provisions of Part XVI apply with such modifications as the circumstances require where a summons or warrant is issued under subsection (2).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 485
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 67
 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F)
 1997, c. 18, s. 40
 2002, c. 13, s. 19

 Marginal note: Recommencement where dismissal for want of prosecution
 485.1  Where an indictment in respect of a transaction is dismissed or deemed by any provision of this Act to be dismissed for want of prosecution, a new information shall not be laid and a new indictment shall not be preferred before any court in respect of the same transaction without
 (a)  the personal consent in writing of the Attorney General or Deputy Attorney General, in any prosecution conducted by the Attorney General or in which the Attorney General intervenes; or

 (b)  the written order of a judge of that court, in any prosecution conducted by a prosecutor other than the Attorney General and in which the Attorney General does not intervene.

 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 67

 Marginal note: Exclusion of public in certain cases
 486   (1)  Any proceedings against an accused shall be held in open court, but the presiding judge or justice may order the exclusion of all or any members of the public from the court room for all or part of the proceedings if the judge or justice is of the opinion that such an order is in the interest of public morals, the maintenance of order or the proper administration of justice or is necessary to prevent injury to international relations or national defence or national security.

 Marginal note: Protection of witnesses under 18 and justice system participants
 (2)  For the purposes of subsection (1), the “proper administration of justice” includes ensuring that
 (a)  the interests of witnesses under the age of eighteen years are safeguarded in all proceedings; and

 (b)  justice system participants who are involved in the proceedings are protected.

 Marginal note: Reasons to be stated
 (3)  If an accused is charged with an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155 or 159, subsection 160(2) or (3) or section 163.1, 171, 172, 172.1, 173, 212, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.02 or 279.03 and the prosecutor or the accused applies for an order under subsection (1), the judge or justice shall, if no such order is made, state, by reference to the circumstances of the case, the reason for not making an order.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 486
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 203, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 14, c. 23 (4th Supp.), s. 1
 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F), c. 21, s. 9
 1993, c. 45, s. 7
 1997, c. 16, s. 6
 1999, c. 25, s. 2(Preamble)
 2001, c. 32, s. 29, c. 41, ss. 16, 34, 133
 2002, c. 13, s. 20
 2005, c. 32, s. 15, c. 43, ss. 4, 8

 Marginal note: Support person — witnesses under 18 or who have a disability
 486.1   (1)  In any proceedings against an accused, the judge or justice shall, on application of the prosecutor, of a witness who is under the age of eighteen years or of a witness who has a mental or physical disability, order that a support person of the witness’ choice be permitted to be present and to be close to the witness while the witness testifies, unless the judge or justice is of the opinion that the order would interfere with the proper administration of justice.

 Marginal note: Other witnesses
 (2)  In any proceedings against an accused, the judge or justice may, on application of the prosecutor or a witness, order that a support person of the witness’ choice be permitted to be present and to be close to the witness while the witness testifies if the judge or justice is of the opinion that the order is necessary to obtain a full and candid account from the witness of the acts complained of.

 Marginal note: Application
 (2.1)  An application referred to in subsection (1) or (2) may be made, during the proceedings, to the presiding judge or justice or, before the proceedings begin, to the judge or justice who will preside at the proceedings.

 Marginal note: Factors to be considered
 (3)  In making a determination under subsection (2), the judge or justice shall take into account the age of the witness, whether the witness has a mental or physical disability, the nature of the offence, the nature of any relationship between the witness and the accused, and any other circumstance that the judge or justice considers relevant.

 Marginal note: Witness not to be a support person
 (4)  The judge or justice shall not permit a witness to be a support person unless the judge or justice is of the opinion that doing so is necessary for the proper administration of justice.

 Marginal note: No communication while testifying
 (5)  The judge or justice may order that the support person and the witness not communicate with each other while the witness testifies.

 Marginal note: No adverse inference
 (6)  No adverse inference may be drawn from the fact that an order is, or is not, made under this section.

 2005, c. 32, s. 15

 Marginal note: Testimony outside court room — witnesses under 18 or who have a disability
 486.2   (1)  Despite section 650, in any proceedings against an accused, the judge or justice shall, on application of the prosecutor, of a witness who is under the age of eighteen years or of a witness who is able to communicate evidence but may have difficulty doing so by reason of a mental or physical disability, order that the witness testify outside the court room or behind a screen or other device that would allow the witness not to see the accused, unless the judge or justice is of the opinion that the order would interfere with the proper administration of justice.

 Marginal note: Other witnesses
 (2)  Despite section 650, in any proceedings against an accused, the judge or justice may, on application of the prosecutor or a witness, order that the witness testify outside the court room or behind a screen or other device that would allow the witness not to see the accused if the judge or justice is of the opinion that the order is necessary to obtain a full and candid account from the witness of the acts complained of.

 Marginal note: Application
 (2.1)  An application referred to in subsection (1) or (2) may be made, during the proceedings, to the presiding judge or justice or, before the proceedings begin, to the judge or justice who will preside at the proceedings.

 Marginal note: Factors to be considered
 (3)  In making a determination under subsection (2), the judge or justice shall take into account the factors referred to in subsection 486.1(3).

 Marginal note: Specific offences
 (4)  Despite section 650, if an accused is charged with an offence referred to in subsection (5), the presiding judge or justice may order that any witness testify
 (a)  outside the court room if the judge or justice is of the opinion that the order is necessary to protect the safety of the witness; and

 (b)  outside the court room or behind a screen or other device that would allow the witness not to see the accused if the judge or justice is of the opinion that the order is necessary to obtain a full and candid account from the witness of the acts complained of.

 Marginal note: Offences
 (5)  The offences for the purposes of subsection (4) are
 (a)  an offence under section 423.1, 467.11, 467.12 or 467.13, or a serious offence committed for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with, a criminal organization;

 (b)  a terrorism offence;

 (c)  an offence under subsection 16(1) or (2), 17(1), 19(1), 20(1) or 22(1) of the Security of Information Act ; or

 (d)  an offence under subsection 21(1) or section 23 of the Security of Information Act that is committed in relation to an offence referred to in paragraph (c).

 Marginal note: Same procedure for determination
 (6)  If the judge or justice is of the opinion that it is necessary for a witness to testify in order to determine whether an order under subsection (2) or (4) should be made in respect of that witness, the judge or justice shall order that the witness testify in accordance with that subsection.

 Marginal note: Conditions of exclusion
 (7)  A witness shall not testify outside the court room under subsection (1), (2), (4) or (6) unless arrangements are made for the accused, the judge or justice and the jury to watch the testimony of the witness by means of closed-circuit television or otherwise and the accused is permitted to communicate with counsel while watching the testimony.

 Marginal note: No adverse inference
 (8)  No adverse inference may be drawn from the fact that an order is, or is not, made under this section.

 2005, c. 32, s. 15

 Marginal note: Accused not to cross-examine witness under 18
 486.3   (1)  In any proceedings against an accused, on application of the prosecutor or a witness who is under the age of eighteen years, the accused shall not personally cross-examine the witness, unless the judge or justice is of the opinion that the proper administration of justice requires the accused to personally conduct the cross-examination. The judge or justice shall appoint counsel to conduct the cross-examination if the accused does not personally conduct the cross-examination.

 Marginal note: Other witnesses
 (2)  In any proceedings against an accused, on application of the prosecutor or a witness, the accused shall not personally cross-examine the witness if the judge or justice is of the opinion that, in order to obtain a full and candid account from the witness of the acts complained of, the accused should not personally cross-examine the witness. The judge or justice shall appoint counsel to conduct the cross-examination if the accused does not personally conduct the cross-examination.

 Marginal note: Factors to be considered
 (3)  In making a determination under subsection (2), the judge or justice shall take into account the factors referred to in subsection 486.1(3).

 Marginal note: Victim of criminal harassment
 (4)  In any proceedings in respect of an offence under section 264, on application of the prosecutor or the victim of the offence, the accused shall not personally cross-examine the victim unless the judge or justice is of the opinion that the proper administration of justice requires the accused to personally conduct the cross-examination. The judge or justice shall appoint counsel to conduct the cross-examination if the accused does not personally conduct the cross-examination.

 Marginal note: Application
 (4.1)  An application referred to in subsection (1), (2) or (4) may be made, during the proceedings, to the presiding judge or justice or, before the proceedings begin, to the judge or justice who will preside at the proceedings.

 Marginal note: No adverse inference
 (5)  No adverse inference may be drawn from the fact that counsel is, or is not, appointed under this section.

 2005, c. 32, s. 15

 Marginal note: Order restricting publication — sexual offences
 486.4   (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that any information that could identify the complainant or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in proceedings in respect of
 (a)  any of the following offences:
 (i)  an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 159, 160, 162, 163.1, 170, 171, 172, 172.1, 173, 210, 211, 212, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.02, 279.03, 346 or 347,

 (ii)  an offence under section 144 (rape), 145 (attempt to commit rape), 149 (indecent assault on female), 156 (indecent assault on male) or 245 (common assault) or subsection 246(1) (assault with intent) of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read immediately before January 4, 1983, or

 (iii)  an offence under subsection 146(1) (sexual intercourse with a female under 14) or (2) (sexual intercourse with a female between 14 and 16) or section 151 (seduction of a female between 16 and 18), 153 (sexual intercourse with step-daughter), 155 (buggery or bestiality), 157 (gross indecency), 166 (parent or guardian procuring defilement) or 167 (householder permitting defilement) of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read immediately before January 1, 1988; or

 (b)  two or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred to in any of subparagraphs (a)(i) to (iii).

 Marginal note: Mandatory order on application
 (2)  In proceedings in respect of the offences referred to in paragraph (1)(a) or (b), the presiding judge or justice shall
 (a)  at the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and the complainant of the right to make an application for the order; and

 (b)  on application made by the complainant, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the order.

 Marginal note: Child pornography
 (3)  In proceedings in respect of an offence under section 163.1, a judge or justice shall make an order directing that any information that could identify a witness who is under the age of eighteen years, or any person who is the subject of a representation, written material or a recording that constitutes child pornography within the meaning of that section, shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way.

 Marginal note: Limitation
 (4)  An order made under this section does not apply in respect of the disclosure of information in the course of the administration of justice when it is not the purpose of the disclosure to make the information known in the community.

 2005, c. 32, s. 15, c. 43, s. 8

 Marginal note: Order restricting publication — victims and witnesses
 486.5   (1)  Unless an order is made under section 486.4, on application of the prosecutor, a victim or a witness, a judge or justice may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim or witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way if the judge or justice is satisfied that the order is necessary for the proper administration of justice.

 Marginal note: Justice system participants
 (2)  On application of a justice system participant who is involved in proceedings in respect of an offence referred to in subsection 486.2(5) or of the prosecutor in those proceedings, a judge or justice may make an order directing that any information that could identify the justice system participant shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way if the judge or justice is satisfied that the order is necessary for the proper administration of justice.

 Marginal note: Limitation
 (3)  An order made under this section does not apply in respect of the disclosure of information in the course of the administration of justice if it is not the purpose of the disclosure to make the information known in the community.

 Marginal note: Application and notice
 (4)  An applicant for an order shall
 (a)  apply in writing to the presiding judge or justice or, if the judge or justice has not been determined, to a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction in the judicial district where the proceedings will take place; and

 (b)  provide notice of the application to the prosecutor, the accused and any other person affected by the order that the judge or justice specifies.

 Marginal note: Grounds
 (5)  An applicant for an order shall set out the grounds on which the applicant relies to establish that the order is necessary for the proper administration of justice.

 Marginal note: Hearing may be held
 (6)  The judge or justice may hold a hearing to determine whether an order should be made, and the hearing may be in private.

 Marginal note: Factors to be considered
 (7)  In determining whether to make an order, the judge or justice shall consider
 (a)  the right to a fair and public hearing;

 (b)  whether there is a real and substantial risk that the victim, witness or justice system participant would suffer significant harm if their identity were disclosed;

 (c)  whether the victim, witness or justice system participant needs the order for their security or to protect them from intimidation or retaliation;

 (d)  society’s interest in encouraging the reporting of offences and the participation of victims, witnesses and justice system participants in the criminal justice process;

 (e)  whether effective alternatives are available to protect the identity of the victim, witness or justice system participant;

 (f)  the salutary and deleterious effects of the proposed order;

 (g)  the impact of the proposed order on the freedom of expression of those affected by it; and

 (h)  any other factor that the judge or justice considers relevant.

 Marginal note: Conditions
 (8)  An order may be subject to any conditions that the judge or justice thinks fit.

 Marginal note: Publication prohibited
 (9)  Unless the judge or justice refuses to make an order, no person shall publish in any document or broadcast or transmit in any way
 (a)  the contents of an application;

 (b)  any evidence taken, information given or submissions made at a hearing under subsection (6); or

 (c)  any other information that could identify the person to whom the application relates as a victim, witness or justice system participant in the proceedings.

 2005, c. 32, s. 15

 Marginal note: Offence
 486.6   (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under subsection 486.4(1), (2) or (3) or 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Application of order
 (2)  For greater certainty, an order referred to in subsection (1) applies to prohibit, in relation to proceedings taken against any person who fails to comply with the order, the publication in any document or the broadcasting or transmission in any way of information that could identify a victim, witness or justice system participant whose identity is protected by the order.

 2005, c. 32, s. 15

 Marginal note: Information for search warrant
 487   (1)  A justice who is satisfied by information on oath in Form 1 that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there is in a building, receptacle or place
 (a)  anything on or in respect of which any offence against this Act or any other Act of Parliament has been or is suspected to have been committed,

 (b)  anything that there are reasonable grounds to believe will afford evidence with respect to the commission of an offence, or will reveal the whereabouts of a person who is believed to have committed an offence, against this Act or any other Act of Parliament,

 (c)  anything that there are reasonable grounds to believe is intended to be used for the purpose of committing any offence against the person for which a person may be arrested without warrant, or

 (c.1)  any offence-related property,

 may at any time issue a warrant authorizing a peace officer or a public officer who has been appointed or designated to administer or enforce a federal or provincial law and whose duties include the enforcement of this Act or any other Act of Parliament and who is named in the warrant
 (d)  to search the building, receptacle or place for any such thing and to seize it, and

 (e)  subject to any other Act of Parliament, to, as soon as practicable, bring the thing seized before, or make a report in respect thereof to, the justice or some other justice for the same territorial division in accordance with section 489.1.

 Marginal note: Endorsement of search warrant
 (2)  Where the building, receptacle or place in which anything mentioned in subsection (1) is believed to be is in any other territorial division, the justice may issue his warrant in like form modified according to the circumstances, and the warrant may be executed in the other territorial division after it has been endorsed, in Form 28, by a justice having jurisdiction in that territorial division.

 Marginal note: Operation of computer system and copying equipment
 (2.1)  A person authorized under this section to search a computer system in a building or place for data may
 (a)  use or cause to be used any computer system at the building or place to search any data contained in or available to the computer system;

 (b)  reproduce or cause to be reproduced any data in the form of a print-out or other intelligible output;

 (c)  seize the print-out or other output for examination or copying; and

 (d)  use or cause to be used any copying equipment at the place to make copies of the data.

 Marginal note: Duty of person in possession or control
 (2.2)  Every person who is in possession or control of any building or place in respect of which a search is carried out under this section shall, on presentation of the warrant, permit the person carrying out the search
 (a)  to use or cause to be used any computer system at the building or place in order to search any data contained in or available to the computer system for data that the person is authorized by this section to search for;

 (b)  to obtain a hard copy of the data and to seize it; and

 (c)  to use or cause to be used any copying equipment at the place to make copies of the data.

 Marginal note: Form
 (3)  A search warrant issued under this section may be in the form set out as Form 5 in Part XXVIII, varied to suit the case.

 Marginal note: Effect of endorsement
 (4)  An endorsement that is made on a warrant as provided for in subsection (2) is sufficient authority to the peace officers or public officers to whom it was originally directed, and to all peace officers within the jurisdiction of the justice by whom it is endorsed, to execute the warrant and to deal with the things seized in accordance with section 489.1 or as otherwise provided by law.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 487
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 68
 1994, c. 44, s. 36
 1997, c. 18, s. 41, c. 23, s. 12
 1999, c. 5, s. 16

 Marginal note: Information for general warrant
 487.01   (1)  A provincial court judge, a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a judge as defined in section 552 may issue a warrant in writing authorizing a peace officer to, subject to this section, use any device or investigative technique or procedure or do any thing described in the warrant that would, if not authorized, constitute an unreasonable search or seizure in respect of a person or a person’s property if
 (a)  the judge is satisfied by information on oath in writing that there are reasonable grounds to believe that an offence against this or any other Act of Parliament has been or will be committed and that information concerning the offence will be obtained through the use of the technique, procedure or device or the doing of the thing;

 (b)  the judge is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the administration of justice to issue the warrant; and

 (c)  there is no other provision in this or any other Act of Parliament that would provide for a warrant, authorization or order permitting the technique, procedure or device to be used or the thing to be done.

 Marginal note: Limitation
 (2)  Nothing in subsection (1) shall be construed as to permit interference with the bodily integrity of any person.

 Marginal note: Search or seizure to be reasonable
 (3)  A warrant issued under subsection (1) shall contain such terms and conditions as the judge considers advisable to ensure that any search or seizure authorized by the warrant is reasonable in the circumstances.

 Marginal note: Video surveillance
 (4)  A warrant issued under subsection (1) that authorizes a peace officer to observe, by means of a television camera or other similar electronic device, any person who is engaged in activity in circumstances in which the person has a reasonable expectation of privacy shall contain such terms and conditions as the judge considers advisable to ensure that the privacy of the person or of any other person is respected as much as possible.

 Marginal note: Other provisions to apply
 (5)  The definition offence in section 183 and sections 183.1, 184.2, 184.3 and 185 to 188.2, subsection 189(5), and sections 190, 193 and 194 to 196 apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to a warrant referred to in subsection (4) as though references in those provisions to interceptions of private communications were read as references to observations by peace officers by means of television cameras or similar electronic devices of activities in circumstances in which persons had reasonable expectations of privacy.

 Marginal note: Notice after covert entry
 (5.1)  A warrant issued under subsection (1) that authorizes a peace officer to enter and search a place covertly shall require, as part of the terms and conditions referred to in subsection (3), that notice of the entry and search be given within any time after the execution of the warrant that the judge considers reasonable in the circumstances.

 Marginal note: Extension of period for giving notice
 (5.2)  Where the judge who issues a warrant under subsection (1) or any other judge having jurisdiction to issue such a warrant is, on the basis of an affidavit submitted in support of an application to vary the period within which the notice referred to in subsection (5.1) is to be given, is satisfied that the interests of justice warrant the granting of the application, the judge may grant an extension, or a subsequent extension, of the period, but no extension may exceed three years.

 Marginal note: Provisions to apply
 (6)  Subsections 487(2) and (4) apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to a warrant issued under subsection (1).

 Marginal note: Telewarrant provisions to apply
 (7)  Where a peace officer believes that it would be impracticable to appear personally before a judge to make an application for a warrant under this section, a warrant may be issued under this section on an information submitted by telephone or other means of telecommunication and, for that purpose, section 487.1 applies, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to the warrant.

 1993, c. 40, s. 15
 1997, c. 18, s. 42, c. 23, s. 13

 Marginal note: Definitions
 487.011  The following definitions apply in sections 487.012 to 487.017.
 data
 données
 data has the same meaning as in subsection 342.1(2). ( données )
 document
 document
 document means any medium on which is recorded or marked anything that is capable of being read or understood by a person or a computer system or other device. ( document )
 2004, c. 3, s. 7

 Marginal note: Production order
 487.012   (1)  A justice or judge may order a person, other than a person under investigation for an offence referred to in paragraph (3)(a),
 (a)  to produce documents, or copies of them certified by affidavit to be true copies, or to produce data; or

 (b)  to prepare a document based on documents or data already in existence and produce it.

 Marginal note: Production to peace officer
 (2)  The order shall require the documents or data to be produced within the time, at the place and in the form specified and given
 (a)  to a peace officer named in the order; or

 (b)  to a public officer named in the order, who has been appointed or designated to administer or enforce a federal or provincial law and whose duties include the enforcement of this or any other Act of Parliament.

 Marginal note: Conditions for issuance of order
 (3)  Before making an order, the justice or judge must be satisfied, on the basis of an ex parte application containing information on oath in writing, that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
 (a)  an offence against this Act or any other Act of Parliament has been or is suspected to have been committed;

 (b)  the documents or data will afford evidence respecting the commission of the offence; and

 (c)  the person who is subject to the order has possession or control of the documents or data.

 Marginal note: Terms and conditions
 (4)  The order may contain any terms and conditions that the justice or judge considers advisable in the circumstances, including terms and conditions to protect a privileged communication between a lawyer and their client or, in the province of Quebec, between a lawyer or a notary and their client.

 Marginal note: Power to revoke, renew or vary order
 (5)  The justice or judge who made the order, or a judge of the same territorial division, may revoke, renew or vary the order on an ex parte application made by the peace officer or public officer named in the order.

 Marginal note: Application
 (6)  Sections 489.1 and 490 apply, with any modifications that the circumstances require, in respect of documents or data produced under this section.

 Marginal note: Probative force of copies
 (7)  Every copy of a document produced under this section, on proof by affidavit that it is a true copy, is admissible in evidence in proceedings under this or any other Act of Parliament and has the same probative force as the original document would have if it had been proved in the ordinary way.

 Marginal note: Return of copies
 (8)  Copies of documents produced under this section need not be returned.

 2004, c. 3, s. 7

 Marginal note: Production order — financial or commercial information
 487.013   (1)  A justice or judge may order a financial institution, as defined in section 2 of the Bank Act , or a person or entity referred to in section 5 of the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act , unless they are under investigation for an offence referred to in paragraph (4)(a), to produce in writing the account number of a person named in the order or the name of a person whose account number is specified in the order, the status and type of the account, and the date on which it was opened or closed.

 Marginal note: Identification of person named in the order
 (2)  For the purpose of confirming the identity of the person named in the order or whose account number is specified in the order, the production order may require the financial institution, person or entity to produce that person’s date of birth, current address and any previous addresses.

 Marginal note: Production to peace officer
 (3)  The order shall require the information to be produced within the time, at the place and in the form specified and given
 (a)  to a peace officer named in the order; or

 (b)  to a public officer named in the order, who has been appointed or designated to administer or enforce a federal or provincial law and whose duties include the enforcement of this or any other Act of Parliament.

 Marginal note: Conditions for issuance of order
 (4)  Before making an order, the justice or judge must be satisfied, on the basis of an ex parte application containing information on oath in writing, that there are reasonable grounds to suspect that
 (a)  an offence against this Act or any other Act of Parliament has been or will be committed;

 (b)  the information will assist in the investigation of the offence; and

 (c)  the institution, person or entity that is subject to the order has possession or control of the information.

 Marginal note: Terms and conditions
 (5)  The order may contain any terms and conditions that the justice or judge considers advisable in the circumstances, including terms and conditions to protect a privileged communication between a lawyer and their client or, in the province of Quebec, between a lawyer or a notary and their client.

 Marginal note: Power to revoke, renew or vary order
 (6)  The justice or judge who made the order, or a judge of the same territorial division, may revoke, renew or vary the order on an ex parte application made by the peace officer or public officer named in the order.

 2004, c. 3, s. 7

 Marginal note: Power of peace officer
 487.014   (1)  For greater certainty, no production order is necessary for a peace officer or public officer enforcing or administering this or any other Act of Parliament to ask a person to voluntarily provide to the officer documents, data or information that the person is not prohibited by law from disclosing.

 Marginal note: Application of section 25
 (2)  A person who provides documents, data or information in the circumstances referred to in subsection (1) is deemed to be authorized to do so for the purposes of section 25.

 2004, c. 3, s. 7

 Marginal note: Application for exemption
 487.015   (1)  A person named in an order made under section 487.012 and a financial institution, person or entity named in an order made under section 487.013 may, before the order expires, apply in writing to the judge who issued the order, or a judge of the same territorial division as the judge or justice who issued the order, for an exemption from the requirement to produce any document, data or information referred to in the order.

 Marginal note: Notice
 (2)  A person, financial institution or entity may only make an application under subsection (1) if they give notice of their intention to do so to the peace officer or public officer named in the order, within 30 days after it is made.

 Marginal note: Order suspended
 (3)  The execution of a production order is suspended in respect of any document, data or information referred to in the application for exemption until a final decision is made in respect of the application.

 Marginal note: Exemption
 (4)  The judge may grant the exemption if satisfied that
 (a)  the document, data or information would disclose information that is privileged or otherwise protected from disclosure by law;

 (b)  it is unreasonable to require the applicant to produce the document, data or information; or

 (c)  the document, data or information is not in the possession or control of the applicant.

 2004, c. 3, s. 7

 Marginal note: Self-incrimination
 487.016  No person is excused from complying with an order made under section 487.012 or 487.013 on the ground that the document, data or information referred to in the order may tend to incriminate them or subject them to any proceeding or penalty, but no document prepared by an individual under paragraph 487.012(1)(b) may be used or received in evidence against that individual in any criminal proceedings subsequently instituted against them, other than a prosecution under section 132, 136 or 137.
 2004, c. 3, s. 7

 Marginal note: Offence
 487.017  A financial institution, person or entity who does not comply with a production order made under section 487.012 or 487.013 is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding $250,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or to both.
 2004, c. 3, s. 7

 Marginal note: Assistance order
 487.02  Where an authorization is given under section 184.2, 184.3, 186 or 188, a warrant is issued under this Act or an order is made under subsection 492.2(2), the judge or justice who gives the authorization, issues the warrant or makes the order may order any person to provide assistance, where the person’s assistance may reasonably be considered to be required to give effect to the authorization, warrant or order.
 1993, c. 40, s. 15
 1997, c. 18, s. 43

 Marginal note: Execution in another province
 487.03   (1)  Where
 (a)  a warrant is issued under section 487.01, 487.05 or 492.1 or subsection 492.2(1) in one province,

 (b)  it may reasonably be expected that the warrant is to be executed in another province, and

 (c)  the execution of the warrant would require entry into or on the property of any person in the other province or would require that an order be made under section 487.02 with respect to any person in that other province,

 a judge or justice, as the case may be, in the other province may, on application, endorse the warrant and the warrant, after being so endorsed, has the same force in that other province as though it had originally been issued in that other province.

 (2)   [Repealed, 2007, c. 22, s. 7]

 1993, c. 40, s. 15
 1995, c. 27, s. 1
 2000, c. 10, s. 13
 2007, c. 22, s. 7

 Forensic DNA Analysis
 Marginal note: Definitions
 487.04  In this section and in sections 487.05 to 487.0911,
 adult
 adulte
 adult has the meaning assigned by subsection 2(1) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act ; ( adulte )
 designated offence
 infraction désignée
 designated offence means a primary designated offence or a secondary designated offence; ( infraction désignée )
 DNA
 ADN
 DNA means deoxyribonucleic acid; ( ADN )
 forensic DNA analysis
 analyse génétique
 forensic DNA analysis
 (a)  in relation to a bodily substance that is taken from a person in execution of a warrant under section 487.05, means forensic DNA analysis of the bodily substance and the comparison of the results of that analysis with the results of the analysis of the DNA in the bodily substance referred to in paragraph 487.05(1)(b), and includes any incidental tests associated with that analysis, and

 (b)  in relation to a bodily substance that is provided voluntarily in the course of an investigation of a designated offence or is taken from a person under an order made under section 487.051 or an authorization granted under section 487.055 or 487.091, or to a bodily substance referred to in paragraph 487.05(1)(b), means forensic DNA analysis of the bodily substance; ( analyse génétique )

 primary designated offence
 infraction primaire
 primary designated offence means
 (a)  an offence under any of the following provisions, namely,
 (i)  subsection 212(2.1) (aggravated offence in relation to living on the avails of prostitution of a person under the age of eighteen years),

 (ii)  section 235 (murder),

 (iii)  section 236 (manslaughter),

 (iv)  section 239 (attempt to commit murder),

 (v)  section 244 (causing bodily harm with intent — firearm),

 (vi)  section 244.1 (causing bodily harm with intent — air gun or pistol),

 (vii)  paragraph 245(a) (administering noxious thing with intent to endanger life or cause bodily harm),

 (viii)  section 246 (overcoming resistance to commission of offence),

 (ix)  section 267 (assault with a weapon or causing bodily harm),

 (x)  section 268 (aggravated assault),

 (xi)  section 269 (unlawfully causing bodily harm),

 (xii)  section 272 (sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm),

 (xiii)  section 273 (aggravated sexual assault),

 (xiv)  section 279 (kidnapping),

 (xv)  section 344 (robbery), and

 (xvi)  section 346 (extortion),

 (a.1)  an offence under any of the following provisions, namely,
 (i)  section 75 (piratical acts),

 (i.01)  section 76 (hijacking),

 (i.02)  section 77 (endangering safety of aircraft or airport),

 (i.03)  section 78.1 (seizing control of ship or fixed platform),

 (i.04)  subsection 81(1) (using explosives),

 (i.05)  section 83.18 (participation in activity of terrorist group),

 (i.06)  section 83.19 (facilitating terrorist activity),

 (i.07)  section 83.2 (commission of offence for terrorist group),

 (i.08)  section 83.21 (instructing to carry out activity for terrorist group),

 (i.09)  section 83.22 (instructing to carry out terrorist activity),

 (i.1)  section 83.23 (harbouring or concealing),

 (i.11)  section 151 (sexual interference),

 (ii)  section 152 (invitation to sexual touching),

 (iii)  section 153 (sexual exploitation),

 (iii.1)  section 153.1 (sexual exploitation of person with disability),

 (iv)  section 155 (incest),

 (iv.1)  subsection 163.1(2) (making child pornography),

 (iv.2)  subsection 163.1(3) (distribution, etc., of child pornography),

 (iv.3)  subsection 163.1(4) (possession of child pornography),

 (iv.4)  subsection 163.1(4.1) (accessing child pornography),

 (iv.5)  section 172.1 (luring a child),

 (v)  subsection 212(1) (procuring),

 (v.1)  subsection 212(2) (procuring),

 (v.2)  subsection 212(4) (offence — prostitution of person under eighteen),

 (vi)  section 233 (infanticide),

 (vii)  section 271 (sexual assault),

 (vii.1)  section 279.01 (trafficking in persons),

 (viii)  section 279.1 (hostage taking),

 (ix)  paragraph 348(1)(d) (breaking and entering a dwelling-house),

 (x)  section 423.1 (intimidation of a justice system participant or journalist),

 (xi)  section 431 (attack on premises, residence or transport of internationally protected person),

 (xii)  section 431.1 (attack on premises, accommodation or transport of United Nations or associated personnel),

 (xiii)  subsection 431.2(2) (explosive or other lethal device),

 (xiv)  section 467.11 (participation in activities of criminal organization),

 (xv)  section 467.12 (commission of offence for criminal organization), and

 (xvi)  section 467.13 (instructing commission of offence for criminal organization),

 (xvi.1)  to (xx) [Repealed, 2005, c. 25, s. 1]

 (b)  an offence under any of the following provisions of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as they read from time to time before January 4, 1983, namely,
 (i)  section 144 (rape),

 (ii)  section 146 (sexual intercourse with female under fourteen and between fourteen and sixteen),

 (iii)  section 148 (sexual intercourse with feeble-minded, etc.),

 (iv)  section 149 (indecent assault on female),

 (v)  section 156 (indecent assault on male), and

 (vi)  section 157 (acts of gross indecency),

 (c)  an offence under paragraph 153(1)(a) (sexual intercourse with step-daughter, etc.) of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read from time to time before January 1, 1988,

 (c.1)  an offence under any of the following provisions of the Security of Information Act , namely,
 (i)  section 6 (approaching, entering, etc., a prohibited place),

 (ii)  subsection 20(1) (threats or violence), and

 (iii)  subsection 21(1) (harbouring or concealing), and

 (d)  an attempt to commit or, other than for the purposes of subsection 487.05(1), a conspiracy to commit an offence referred to in any of paragraphs (a) to (c); ( infraction primaire )

 provincial court judge
 juge de la cour provinciale
 provincial court judge , in relation to a young person, includes a youth justice court judge within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act ; ( juge de la cour provinciale )
 secondary designated offence
 infraction secondaire
 secondary designated offence “secondary designated offence” means an offence, other than a primary designated offence, that is
 (a)  an offence under this Act that may be prosecuted by indictment — or, for section 487.051 to apply, is prosecuted by indictment — for which the maximum punishment is imprisonment for five years or more,

 (b)  an offence under any of the following provisions of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act that may be prosecuted by indictment — or, for section 487.051 to apply, is prosecuted by indictment — for which the maximum punishment is imprisonment for five years or more:
 (i)  section 5 (trafficking in substance and possession for purpose of trafficking),

 (ii)  section 6 (importing and exporting), and

 (iii)  section 7 (production of substance),

 (c)  an offence under any of the following provisions of this Act:
 (i)  section 145 (escape and being at large without excuse),

 (i.1)  section 146 (permitting or assisting escape),

 (i.2)  section 147 (rescue or permitting escape),

 (i.3)  section 148 (assisting prisoner of war to escape),

 (i.4)  subsection 160(3) (bestiality in pres­ence of or by child),

 (ii)  section 170 (parent or guardian procuring sexual activity),

 (iii)  section 173 (indecent acts),

 (iv)  section 252 (failure to stop at scene of accident),

 (v)  section 264 (criminal harassment),

 (vi)  section 264.1 (uttering threats),

 (vii)  section 266 (assault),

 (viii)  section 270 (assaulting a peace officer),

 (ix)  paragraph 348(1)(e) (breaking and entering a place other than a dwelling-house),

 (x)  section 349 (being unlawfully in dwelling-house), and

 (xi)  section 423 (intimidation),

 (d)  an offence under any of the following provisions of the Criminal Code , as they read from time to time before July 1, 1990:
 (i)  section 433 (arson), and

 (ii)  section 434 (setting fire to other substance), and

 (e)  an attempt to commit or, other than for the purposes of subsection 487.05(1), a conspiracy to commit
 (i)  an offence referred to in paragraph (a) or (b) — which, for section 487.051 to apply, is prosecuted by indictment, or

 (ii)  an offence referred to in paragraph (c) or (d); ( infraction secondaire )

 Young Offenders Act
 Loi sur les jeunes contrevenants
 Young Offenders Act means chapter Y-1 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1985; ( Loi sur les jeunes contrevenants )
 young person
 adolescent
 young person has the meaning assigned by subsection 2(1) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act or subsection 2(1) of the Young Offenders Act, as the case may be. ( adolescent )
 1995, c. 27, s. 1
 1998, c. 37, s. 15
 2001, c. 41, s. 17
 2002, c. 1, s. 175
 2005, c. 25, s. 1, c. 43, ss. 5, 9
 2007, c. 22, ss. 2, 8, 47

 Marginal note: Information for warrant to take bodily substances for forensic DNA analysis
 487.05   (1)  A provincial court judge who on ex parte application made in Form 5.01 is satisfied by information on oath that there are reasonable grounds to believe
 (a)  that a designated offence has been committed,

 (b)  that a bodily substance has been found or obtained
 (i)  at the place where the offence was committed,

 (ii)  on or within the body of the victim of the offence,

 (iii)  on anything worn or carried by the victim at the time when the offence was committed, or

 (iv)  on or within the body of any person or thing or at any place associated with the commission of the offence,

 (c)  that a person was a party to the offence, and

 (d)  that forensic DNA analysis of a bodily substance from the person will provide evidence about whether the bodily substance referred to in paragraph (b) was from that person

 and who is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the administration of justice to do so may issue a warrant in Form 5.02 authorizing the taking, from that person, for the purpose of forensic DNA analysis, of any number of samples of one or more bodily substances that is reasonably required for that purpose, by means of the investigative procedures described in subsection 487.06(1).

 Marginal note: Criteria
 (2)  In considering whether to issue the warrant, the provincial court judge shall have regard to all relevant matters, including
 (a)  the nature of the designated offence and the circumstances of its commission; and

 (b)  whether there is
 (i)  a peace officer who is able, by virtue of training or experience, to take samples of bodily substances from the person, by means of the investigative procedures described in subsection 487.06(1), or

 (ii)  another person who is able, by virtue of training or experience, to take, under the direction of a peace officer, samples of bodily substances from the person, by means of those investigative procedures.

 Marginal note: Telewarrant
 (3)  Where a peace officer believes that it would be impracticable to appear personally before a judge to make an application for a warrant under this section, a warrant may be issued under this section on an information submitted by telephone or other means of telecommunication and, for that purpose, section 487.1 applies, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to the warrant.

 1995, c. 27, s. 1
 1997, c. 18, s. 44
 1998, c. 37, s. 16
 2005, c. 25, s. 2(F)

 Marginal note: Order — primary designated offences
 487.051   (1)  The court shall make an order in Form 5.03 authorizing the taking of the number of samples of bodily substances that is reasonably required for the purpose of forensic DNA analysis from a person who is convicted, discharged under section 730 or found guilty under the Youth Criminal Justice Act or the Young Offenders Act , of an offence committed at any time, including before June 30, 2000, if that offence is a primary designated offence within the meaning of paragraph (a) of the definition primary designated offence in section 487.04 when the person is sentenced or discharged.

 Marginal note: Order — primary designated offences
 (2)  The court shall make such an order in Form 5.03 in relation to a person who is convicted, discharged under section 730 or found guilty under the Youth Criminal Justice Act or the Young Offenders Act , of an offence committed at any time, including before June 30, 2000, if that offence is a primary designated offence within the meaning of any of paragraphs (a.1) to (d) of the definition primary designated offence in section 487.04 when the person is sentenced or discharged. However, the court is not required to make the order if it is satisfied that the person has established that the impact of such an order on their privacy and security of the person would be grossly disproportionate to the public interest in the protection of society and the proper administration of justice, to be achieved through the early detection, arrest and conviction of offenders.

 Marginal note: Order — persons found not criminally responsible and secondary designated offences
 (3)  The court may, on application by the prosecutor and if it is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the administration of justice to do so, make such an order in Form 5.04 in relation to
 (a)  a person who is found not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder for an offence committed at any time, including before June 30, 2000, if that offence is a designated offence when the finding is made; or

 (b)  a person who is convicted, discharged under section 730 or found guilty under the Youth Criminal Justice Act or the Young Offenders Act , of an offence committed at any time, including before June 30, 2000, if that offence is a secondary designated offence when the person is sentenced or discharged.

 In deciding whether to make the order, the court shall consider the person’s criminal record, whether they were previously found not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder for a designated offence, the nature of the offence, the circumstances surrounding its commission and the impact such an order would have on the person’s privacy and security of the person and shall give reasons for its decision.

 Marginal note: Order to offender
 (4)  When the court makes an order authorizing the taking of samples of bodily substances, it may make an order in Form 5.041 to require the person to report at the place, day and time set out in the order and submit to the taking of the samples.

 1998, c. 37, s. 17
 2002, c. 1, s. 176
 2005, c. 25, s. 3
 2007, c. 22, ss. 9, 47

 487.052   [Repealed, 2007, c. 22, s. 3]
 Marginal note: Timing of order
 487.053   (1)  The court may make an order under section 487.051 authorizing the taking of samples of bodily substances when it imposes a sentence on a person, finds the person not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder or directs that they be discharged under section 730.

 Marginal note: Hearing
 (2)  If the court does not consider the matter at that time, it
 (a)  shall, within 90 days after the day on which it imposes the sentence, makes the finding or directs that the person be discharged, set a date for a hearing to do so;

 (b)  retains jurisdiction over the matter; and

 (c)  may require the person to appear by closed-circuit television or any other means that allows the court and the person to engage in simultaneous visual and oral communication, as long as the person is given the opportunity to communicate privately with counsel if they are represented by counsel.

 1998, c. 37, s. 17
 2000, c. 10, s. 14
 2005, c. 25, s. 4
 2007, c. 22, s. 3

 Marginal note: Appeal
 487.054  The offender or the prosecutor may appeal from a decision of the court under any of subsections 487.051(1) to (3).
 1998, c. 37, s. 17
 2007, c. 22, s. 10

 Marginal note: Offenders serving sentences
 487.055   (1)  A provincial court judge may, on ex parte application made in Form 5.05, authorize in Form 5.06 the taking, for the purpose of forensic DNA analysis, of any number of samples of bodily substances that is reasonably required for that purpose, by means of the investigative procedures described in subsection 487.06(1), from a person who, before June 30, 2000,
 (a)  had been declared a dangerous offender under Part XXIV;

 (b)  had been declared a dangerous offender or a dangerous sexual offender under Part XXI of the Criminal Code , being chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read from time to time before January 1, 1988;

 (c)  had been convicted of murder;

 (c.1)  had been convicted of attempted murder or conspiracy to commit murder or to cause another person to be murdered and, on the date of the application, is serving a sentence of imprisonment for that offence;

 (d)  had been convicted of a sexual offence within the meaning of subsection (3) and, on the date of the application, is serving a sentence of imprisonment for that offence; or

 (e)  had been convicted of manslaughter and, on the date of the application, is serving a sentence of imprisonment for that offence.

 Marginal note: Certificate
 (2)  The application shall be accompanied by a certificate referred to in paragraph 667(1)(a) that establishes that the person is a person referred to in subsection (1). The certificate may be received in evidence without giving the notice referred to in subsection 667(4).

 Marginal note: Definition of “sexual offence”
 (3)  For the purposes of subsection (1), sexual offence means
 (a)  an offence under any of the following provisions, namely,
 (i)  section 151 (sexual interference),

 (ii)  section 152 (invitation to sexual touching),

 (iii)  section 153 (sexual exploitation),

 (iv)  section 155 (incest),

 (v)  subsection 212(4) (offence in relation to juvenile prostitution),

 (vi)  section 271 (sexual assault),

 (vii)  section 272 (sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm), and

 (viii)  section 273 (aggravated sexual assault);

 (a.1)  an offence under subsection 348(1) if the indictable offence referred to in that subsection is a sexual offence within the meaning of paragraph (a), (b), (c) or (d);

 (b)  an offence under any of the following provisions of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as they read from time to time before January 4, 1983, namely,
 (i)  section 144 (rape),

 (ii)  section 146 (sexual intercourse with female under fourteen or between fourteen and sixteen),

 (iii)  section 148 (sexual intercourse with feeble-minded, etc.),

 (iv)  section 149 (indecent assault on female),

 (v)  section 156 (indecent assault on male), or

 (vi)  section 157 (acts of gross indecency);

 (c)  an offence under paragraph 153(1)(a) (sexual intercourse with step-daughter, etc.) of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read from time to time before January 1, 1988; and

 (d)  an attempt to commit an offence referred to in any of paragraphs (a) to (c).

 Marginal note: Manner of appearance
 (3.01)  The court may require a person who is given notice of an application under subsection (1) and who wishes to appear at the hearing to appear by closed-circuit television or any other means that allows the court and the person to engage in simultaneous visual and oral communication, as long as the person is given the opportunity to communicate privately with counsel if they are represented by counsel.

 Marginal note: Criteria
 (3.1)  In deciding whether to grant an authorization under subsection (1), the court shall consider the person’s criminal record, the nature of the offence and the circumstances surrounding its commission and the impact such an authorization would have on the privacy and security of the person and shall give reasons for its decision.

 Marginal note: Order
 (3.11)  If the court authorizes the taking of samples of bodily substances from a person who is on conditional release and who has appeared at the hearing, it shall make an order in Form 5.041 to require the person to report at the place, day and time set out in the order and submit to the taking of the samples.

 Marginal note: Summons
 (4)  However, if a person who is on conditional release has not appeared at the hearing, a summons in Form 5.061 setting out the information referred to in paragraphs 487.07(1)(b) to (d) shall be directed to them requiring them to report at the place, day and time set out in the summons and submit to the taking of the samples.

 Marginal note: Service on individual
 (5)  The summons shall be accompanied by a copy of the authorization referred to in subsection (1) and be served by a peace officer who shall either deliver it personally to the person to whom it is directed or, if that person cannot conveniently be found, leave it for the person at their latest or usual place of residence with any person found there who appears to be at least sixteen years of age.

 Marginal note: Proof of service
 (6)  Service of a summons may be proved by the oral evidence, given under oath, of the peace officer who served it or by the peace officer’s affidavit made before a justice of the peace or other person authorized to administer oaths or to take affidavits.

 (7)  to (10) [Repealed, 2007, c. 22, s. 11]

 1998, c. 37, s. 17
 2000, c. 10, s. 15
 2005, c. 25, s. 5
 2007, c. 22, s. 11

 Marginal note: Failure to appear
 487.0551   (1)  If a person fails to appear at the place, day and time set out in an order made under subsection 487.051(4) or 487.055(3.11) or in a summons referred to in subsection 487.055(4) or 487.091(3), a justice of the peace may issue a warrant for their arrest in Form 5.062 to allow samples of bodily substances to be taken.

 Marginal note: Execution of warrant
 (2)  The warrant may be executed anywhere in Canada by a peace officer who has jurisdiction in that place or over the person. The warrant remains in force until it is executed.

 2007, c. 22, s. 12

 Marginal note: Failure to comply with order or summons
 487.0552   (1)  Every person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to comply with an order made under subsection 487.051(4) or 487.055(3.11) of this Act or under subsection 196.14(4) or 196.24(4) of the National Defence Act , or with a summons referred to in subsection 487.055(4) or 487.091(3) of this Act, is guilty of
 (a)  an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years; or

 (b)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: For greater certainty
 (2)  For greater certainty, a lawful command that prevents a person from complying with an order or summons is a reasonable excuse if, at the time, the person is subject to the Code of Service Discipline within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the National Defence Act .

 2007, c. 22, s. 12

 Marginal note: When collection to take place
 487.056   (1)  Samples of bodily substances shall be taken as authorized under section 487.051
 (a)  at the place, day and time set out in an order made under subsection 487.051(4) or as soon as feasible afterwards; or

 (b)  in any other case, on the day on which the order authorizing the taking of the samples is made or as soon as feasible afterwards.

 Marginal note: When collection to take place
 (2)  Samples of bodily substances shall be taken as authorized under section 487.055 or 487.091
 (a)  at the place, day and time set out in an order made under subsection 487.055(3.11) or a summons referred to in subsection 487.055(4) or 487.091(3) or as soon as feasible afterwards; or

 (b)  in any other case, as soon as feasible after the authorization is granted.

 Marginal note: When collection to take place
 (3)  If a person fails to appear as required by an order made under subsection 487.051(4) or 487.055(3.11) or a summons referred to in subsection 487.055(4) or 487.091(3), samples of bodily substances shall be taken
 (a)  when the person is arrested under a warrant issued under subsection 487.0551(1) or as soon as feasible afterwards; or

 (b)  as soon as feasible after the person appears at the place set out in the order or summons if no warrant is issued.

 Marginal note: Appeal
 (4)  Subsections (1) to (3) apply even if the order or authorization to take the samples of bodily substances is appealed.

 Marginal note: Collection of samples
 (5)  A peace officer who is authorized under section 487.051, 487.055 or 487.091 to take samples of bodily substances may cause the samples to be taken in any place in Canada in which the person who is subject to the order or authorization is located.

 Marginal note: Who collects samples
 (6)  The samples shall be taken by a peace officer who has jurisdiction over the person or in the place in which the samples are taken — or a person acting under their direction — who is able, by virtue of training or experience, to take them.

 1998, c. 37, s. 17
 2000, c. 10, s. 16
 2002, c. 1, s. 179(E)
 2005, c. 25, s. 6
 2007, c. 22, s. 13

 Marginal note: Report of peace officer
 487.057   (1)  A peace officer who takes samples of bodily substances from a person or who causes a person who is not a peace officer to take samples under their direction shall, as soon as feasible after the samples are taken, make a written report in Form 5.07 and cause the report to be filed with
 (a)  the provincial court judge who issued the warrant under section 487.05 or granted the authorization under section 487.055 or 487.091 or another judge of that provincial court; or

 (b)  the court that made the order under section 487.051.

 Marginal note: Contents of report
 (2)  The report shall include
 (a)  a statement of the time and date the samples were taken; and

 (b)  a description of the bodily substances that were taken.

 Marginal note: Copy of report
 (3)  A peace officer who takes the samples or causes the samples to be taken under their direction at the request of another peace officer shall send a copy of the report to the other peace officer unless that other peace officer had jurisdiction to take the samples.

 1998, c. 37, s. 17
 2000, c. 10, s. 17
 2007, c. 22, s. 14

 Marginal note: No criminal or civil liability
 487.058  No peace officer, and no person acting under a peace officer’s direction, incurs any criminal or civil liability for anything necessarily done with reasonable care and skill in the taking of samples of bodily substances from a person under a warrant issued under section 487.05, an order made under section 487.051 or an authorization granted under section 487.055 or 487.091.
 1998, c. 37, s. 17
 2000, c. 10, s. 18
 2007, c. 22, s. 15

 Marginal note: Investigative procedures
 487.06   (1)  A peace officer or a person acting under a peace officer’s direction is authorized by a warrant issued under section 487.05, an order made under section 487.051 or an authorization granted under section 487.055 or 487.091 to take samples of bodily substances by any of the following means:
 (a)  the plucking of individual hairs from the person, including the root sheath;

 (b)  the taking of buccal swabs by swabbing the lips, tongue and inside cheeks of the mouth to collect epithelial cells; or

 (c)  the taking of blood by pricking the skin surface with a sterile lancet.

 Marginal note: Terms and conditions
 (2)  The warrant, order or authorization shall include any terms and conditions that the provincial court judge or court, as the case may be, considers advisable to ensure that the taking of the samples authorized by the warrant, order or authorization is reasonable in the circumstances.

 Marginal note: Fingerprints
 (3)  A peace officer who is authorized to take samples of bodily substances from a person by an order made under section 487.051 or an authorization granted under section 487.055 or 487.091, or a person acting under their direction, may take fingerprints from the person for the purpose of the DNA Identification Act .

 1995, c. 27, s. 1
 1998, c. 37, s. 18
 2000, c. 10, s. 19
 2007, c. 22, s. 16

 Marginal note: Duty to inform
 487.07   (1)  Before taking samples of bodily substances from a person, or causing samples to be taken under their direction, in execution of a warrant issued under section 487.05 or an order made under section 487.051 or under an authorization granted under section 487.055 or 487.091, a peace officer shall inform the person of
 (a)  the contents of the warrant, order or authorization;

 (b)  the nature of the investigative procedures by means of which the samples are to be taken;

 (c)  the purpose of taking the samples;

 (d)  the authority of the peace officer and any other person under the direction of the peace officer to use as much force as is necessary for the purpose of taking the samples; and

 (d.1)   [Repealed, 2000, c. 10, s. 20]

 (e)  in the case of samples of bodily substances taken in execution of a warrant,
 (i)  the possibility that the results of forensic DNA analysis may be used in evidence, and

 (ii)  if the sample is taken from a young person, the rights of the young person under subsection (4).

 Marginal note: Detention of person
 (2)  A person from whom samples of bodily substances are to be taken may
 (a)  be detained for that purpose for a period that is reasonable in the circumstances; and

 (b)  be required to accompany a peace officer for that purpose.

 Marginal note: Respect of privacy
 (3)  A peace officer who takes samples of bodily substances from a person, or a person who takes such samples under the direction of a peace officer, shall ensure that the person’s privacy is respected in a manner that is reasonable in the circumstances.

 Marginal note: Execution of warrant against young person
 (4)  A young person against whom a warrant is executed has, in addition to any other rights arising from his or her detention under the warrant,
 (a)  the right to a reasonable opportunity to consult with, and

 (b)  the right to have the warrant executed in the presence of

 counsel and a parent or, in the absence of a parent, an adult relative or, in the absence of a parent and an adult relative, any other appropriate adult chosen by the young person.

 Marginal note: Waiver of rights of young person
 (5)  A young person may waive his or her rights under subsection (4) but any such waiver
 (a)  must be recorded on audio tape or video tape or otherwise; or

 (b)  must be made in writing and contain a statement signed by the young person that he or she has been informed of the right being waived.

 1995, c. 27, ss. 1, 3
 1998, c. 37, s. 19
 2000, c. 10, s. 20
 2007, c. 22, s. 17

 Marginal note: Verification
 487.071   (1)  Before taking samples of bodily substances from a person under an order made under section 487.051 or an authorization granted under section 487.055 or 487.091, a peace officer, or a person acting under their direction, shall verify whether the convicted offenders index of the national DNA data bank, established under the DNA Identification Act , contains the person’s DNA profile.

 Marginal note: DNA profile in data bank
 (2)  If the person’s DNA profile is in the convicted offenders index of the national DNA data bank, the peace officer or person acting under their direction shall not take any bodily substances from the person but shall
 (a)  confirm in writing on the order or authorization that he or she has been advised that the person’s DNA profile is in the DNA data bank; and

 (b)  transmit a copy of the order or authorization containing that confirmation and any other information prescribed by regulations made under the DNA Identification Act to the Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.

 Marginal note: DNA profile not in data bank
 (3)  If the person’s DNA profile is not in the convicted offenders index of the national DNA data bank, the peace officer or person acting under their direction shall execute the order or authorization and transmit to the Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police
 (a)  any bodily substances taken; and

 (b)  a copy of the order or authorization and any other information prescribed by regulations made under the DNA Identification Act .

 1998, c. 37, s. 20
 2000, c. 10, s. 21
 2005, c. 25, s. 8
 2007, c. 22, s. 18

 Marginal note: Use of bodily substances — warrant
 487.08   (1)  No person shall use bodily substances that are taken in execution of a warrant under section 487.05 or under section 196.12 of the National Defence Act except to use them for the purpose of forensic DNA analysis in the course of an investigation of a designated offence.

 Marginal note: Use of bodily substances — order, authorization
 (1.1)  No person shall use bodily substances that are taken in execution of an order made under section 487.051 of this Act or section 196.14 of the National Defence Act , or under an authorization granted under section 487.055 or 487.091 of this Act or section 196.24 of the National Defence Act , except to transmit them to the Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police for the purpose of forensic DNA analysis in accordance with the DNA Identification Act .

 Marginal note: Use of results — warrant
 (2)  No person shall use the results of forensic DNA analysis of bodily substances that are taken in execution of a warrant under section 487.05 or under section 196.12 of the National Defence Act except
 (a)  in the course of an investigation of the designated offence or any other designated offence in respect of which a warrant was issued or a bodily substance was found in the circumstances described in paragraph 487.05(1)(b) or in paragraph 196.12(1)(b) of the National Defence Act ; or

 (b)  in any proceeding for such an offence.

 (2.1)   [Repealed, 2005, c. 25, s. 9]

 Marginal note: Offence
 (3)  Every person who contravenes subsection (1) or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 Marginal note: Offence
 (4)  Every person who contravenes subsection (1.1)
 (a)  is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or

 (b)  is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or to both.

 1995, c. 27, s. 1
 1998, c. 37, s. 21
 2000, c. 10, s. 22
 2005, c. 25, s. 9
 2007, c. 22, s. 19

 Marginal note: Destruction of bodily substances, etc. — warrant
 487.09   (1)  Subject to subsection (2), bodily substances that are taken from a person in execution of a warrant under section 487.05 and the results of forensic DNA analysis shall be destroyed or, in the case of results in electronic form, access to those results shall be permanently removed, without delay after
 (a)  the results of that analysis establish that the bodily substance referred to in paragraph 487.05(1)(b) was not from that person;

 (b)  the person is finally acquitted of the designated offence and any other offence in respect of the same transaction; or

 (c)  the expiration of one year after
 (i)  the person is discharged after a preliminary inquiry into the designated offence or any other offence in respect of the same transaction,

 (ii)  the dismissal, for any reason other than acquittal, or the withdrawal of any information charging the person with the designated offence or any other offence in respect of the same transaction, or

 (iii)  any proceeding against the person for the offence or any other offence in respect of the same transaction is stayed under section 579 or under that section as applied by section 572 or 795,

 unless during that year a new information is laid or an indictment is preferred charging the person with the designated offence or any other offence in respect of the same transaction or the proceeding is recommenced.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (2)  A provincial court judge may order that the bodily substances that are taken from a person and the results of forensic DNA analysis not be destroyed during any period that the provincial court judge considers appropriate if the provincial court judge is satisfied that the bodily substances or results might reasonably be required in an investigation or prosecution of the person for another designated offence or of another person for the designated offence or any other offence in respect of the same transaction.

 Marginal note: Destruction of bodily substances, etc., voluntarily given
 (3)  Bodily substances that are provided voluntarily by a person and the results of forensic DNA analysis shall be destroyed or, in the case of results in electronic form, access to those results shall be permanently removed, without delay after the results of that analysis establish that the bodily substance referred to in paragraph 487.05(1)(b) was not from that person.

 1995, c. 27, s. 1
 1998, c. 37, s. 22

 Marginal note: Collection of additional bodily substances
 487.091   (1)  A provincial court judge may, on ex parte application made in Form 5.08, authorize in Form 5.09 the taking from a person, for the purpose of forensic DNA analysis, of any number of additional samples of bodily substances that is reasonably required for that purpose, by means of the investigative procedures described in subsection 487.06(1), if
 (a)  a DNA profile cannot be derived from the bodily substances that were taken from that person under an order made under section 487.051 or an authorization granted under section 487.055; or

 (b)  the information or bodily substances required by regulations made under the DNA Identification Act were not transmitted in accordance with the requirements of the regulations or were lost.

 Marginal note: Reasons
 (2)  The application shall state the reasons why a DNA profile cannot be derived from the bodily substances or why the information or bodily substances were not transmitted in accordance with the regulations or were lost.

 Marginal note: Persons not in custody
 (3)  If the court authorizes the taking of samples of bodily substances from a person who is not in custody, a summons in Form 5.061 setting out the information referred to in paragraphs 487.07(1)(b) to (d) shall be directed to the person requiring them to report at the place, day and time set out in the summons and submit to the taking of the samples. Subsections 487.055(5) and (6) apply, with any modifications that the circumstances require.

 1998, c. 37, s. 23
 2000, c. 10, s. 23
 2005, c. 25, s. 10
 2007, c. 22, s. 20

 Marginal note: Review by Attorney General
 487.0911   (1)  On receipt of a notice from the Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police under subsection 5.2(1) of the DNA Identification Act that an order made under section 487.051 or an authorization granted under section 487.091 appears to be defective, the Attorney General shall review the order or authorization and the court record.

 Marginal note: Clerical error
 (2)  If the Attorney General is of the opinion that the defect is due to a clerical error, the Attorney General shall
 (a)  apply, ex parte , to the judge who made the order or authorization, or to a judge of the same court, to have it corrected; and

 (b)  transmit a copy of the corrected order or authorization, if any, to the Commissioner.

 Marginal note: Substantive defect
 (3)  If the Attorney General is of the opinion that the offence referred to in the order or authorization is not a designated offence, the Attorney General shall inform the Commissioner of that opinion.

 Marginal note: No defect
 (4)  If the Attorney General is of the opinion that the offence referred to in the order or authorization is a designated offence, the Attorney General shall transmit that opinion, with written reasons, to the Commissioner.

 2005, c. 25, s. 11
 2007, c. 22, s. 21

 Marginal note: Information for impression warrant
 487.092   (1)  A justice may issue a warrant in writing authorizing a peace officer to do any thing, or cause any thing to be done under the direction of the peace officer, described in the warrant in order to obtain any handprint, fingerprint, footprint, foot impression, teeth impression or other print or impression of the body or any part of the body in respect of a person if the justice is satisfied
 (a)  by information on oath in writing that there are reasonable grounds to believe that an offence against this or any other Act of Parliament has been committed and that information concerning the offence will be obtained by the print or impression; and

 (b)  that it is in the best interests of the administration of justice to issue the warrant.

 Marginal note: Search or seizure to be reasonable
 (2)  A warrant issued under subsection (1) shall contain such terms and conditions as the justice considers advisable to ensure that any search or seizure authorized by the warrant is reasonable in the circumstances.

 Marginal note: Provisions to apply
 (3)  Subsections 487(2) and (4) apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to a warrant issued under subsection (1).

 Marginal note: Telewarrant
 (4)  Where a peace officer believes that it would be impracticable to appear personally before a justice to make an application for a warrant under this section, a warrant may be issued under this section on an information submitted by telephone or other means of telecommunication and, for that purpose, section 487.1 applies, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to the warrant.

 1997, c. 18, s. 45
 1998, c. 37, s. 23

 Other Provisions respecting Search Warrants
 Marginal note: Telewarrants
 487.1   (1)  Where a peace officer believes that an indictable offence has been committed and that it would be impracticable to appear personally before a justice to make application for a warrant in accordance with section 256 or 487, the peace officer may submit an information on oath by telephone or other means of telecommunication to a justice designated for the purpose by the chief judge of the provincial court having jurisdiction in the matter.

 Marginal note: Information submitted by telephone
 (2)  An information submitted by telephone or other means of telecommunication, other than a means of telecommunication that produces a writing, shall be on oath and shall be recorded verbatim by the justice, who shall, as soon as practicable, cause to be filed, with the clerk of the court for the territorial division in which the warrant is intended for execution, the record or a transcription of it, certified by the justice as to time, date and contents.

 Marginal note: Information submitted by other means of telecommunication
 (2.1)  The justice who receives an information submitted by a means of telecommunication that produces a writing shall, as soon as practicable, cause to be filed, with the clerk of the court for the territorial division in which the warrant is intended for execution, the information certified by the justice as to time and date of receipt.

 Marginal note: Administration of oath
 (3)  For the purposes of subsection (2), an oath may be administered by telephone or other means of telecommunication.

 Marginal note: Alternative to oath
 (3.1)  A peace officer who uses a means of telecommunication referred to in subsection (2.1) may, instead of swearing an oath, make a statement in writing stating that all matters contained in the information are true to his or her knowledge and belief and such a statement is deemed to be a statement made under oath.

 Marginal note: Contents of information
 (4)  An information submitted by telephone or other means of telecommunication shall include
 (a)  a statement of the circumstances that make it impracticable for the peace officer to appear personally before a justice;

 (b)  a statement of the indictable offence alleged, the place or premises to be searched and the items alleged to be liable to seizure;

 (c)  a statement of the peace officer’s grounds for believing that items liable to seizure in respect of the offence alleged will be found in the place or premises to be searched; and

 (d)  a statement as to any prior application for a warrant under this section or any other search warrant, in respect of the same matter, of which the peace officer has knowledge.

 Marginal note: Issuing warrant
 (5)  A justice referred to in subsection (1) who is satisfied that an information submitted by telephone or other means of telecommunication
 (a)  is in respect of an indictable offence and conforms to the requirements of subsection (4),

 (b)  discloses reasonable grounds for dispensing with an information presented personally and in writing, and

 (c)  discloses reasonable grounds, in accordance with subsection 256(1) or paragraph 487(1)(a), (b) or (c), as the case may be, for the issuance of a warrant in respect of an indictable offence,

 may issue a warrant to a peace officer conferring the same authority respecting search and seizure as may be conferred by a warrant issued by a justice before whom the peace officer appears personally pursuant to subsection 256(1) or 487(1), as the case may be, and may require that the warrant be executed within such time period as the justice may order.

 Marginal note: Formalities respecting warrant and facsimiles
 (6)  Where a justice issues a warrant by telephone or other means of telecommunication, other than a means of telecommunication that produces a writing,
 (a)  the justice shall complete and sign the warrant in Form 5.1, noting on its face the time, date and place of issuance;

 (b)  the peace officer, on the direction of the justice, shall complete, in duplicate, a facsimile of the warrant in Form 5.1, noting on its face the name of the issuing justice and the time, date and place of issuance; and

 (c)  the justice shall, as soon as practicable after the warrant has been issued, cause the warrant to be filed with the clerk of the court for the territorial division in which the warrant is intended for execution.

 Marginal note: Issuance of warrant where telecommunication produces writing
 (6.1)  Where a justice issues a warrant by a means of telecommunication that produces a writing,
 (a)  the justice shall complete and sign the warrant in Form 5.1, noting on its face the time, date and place of issuance;

 (b)  the justice shall transmit the warrant by the means of telecommunication to the peace officer who submitted the information and the copy of the warrant received by the peace officer is deemed to be a facsimile within the meaning of paragraph (6)(b);

 (c)  the peace officer shall procure another facsimile of the warrant; and

 (d)  the justice shall, as soon as practicable after the warrant has been issued, cause the warrant to be filed with the clerk of the court for the territorial division in which the warrant is intended for execution.

 Marginal note: Providing facsimile
 (7)  A peace officer who executes a warrant issued by telephone or other means of telecommunication, other than a warrant issued pursuant to subsection 256(1), shall, before entering the place or premises to be searched or as soon as practicable thereafter, give a facsimile of the warrant to any person present and ostensibly in control of the place or premises.

 Marginal note: Affixing facsimile
 (8)  A peace officer who, in any unoccupied place or premises, executes a warrant issued by telephone or other means of telecommunication, other than a warrant issued pursuant to subsection 256(1), shall, on entering the place or premises or as soon as practicable thereafter, cause a facsimile of the warrant to be suitably affixed in a prominent place within the place or premises.

 Marginal note: Report of peace officer
 (9)  A peace officer to whom a warrant is issued by telephone or other means of telecommunication shall file a written report with the clerk of the court for the territorial division in which the warrant was intended for execution as soon as practicable but within a period not exceeding seven days after the warrant has been executed, which report shall include
 (a)  a statement of the time and date the warrant was executed or, if the warrant was not executed, a statement of the reasons why it was not executed;

 (b)  a statement of the things, if any, that were seized pursuant to the warrant and the location where they are being held; and

 (c)  a statement of the things, if any, that were seized in addition to the things mentioned in the warrant and the location where they are being held, together with a statement of the peace officer’s grounds for believing that those additional things had been obtained by, or used in, the commission of an offence.

 Marginal note: Bringing before justice
 (10)  The clerk of the court shall, as soon as practicable, cause the report, together with the information and the warrant to which it pertains, to be brought before a justice to be dealt with, in respect of the things seized referred to in the report, in the same manner as if the things were seized pursuant to a warrant issued, on an information presented personally by a peace officer, by that justice or another justice for the same territorial division.

 Marginal note: Proof of authorization
 (11)  In any proceeding in which it is material for a court to be satisfied that a search or seizure was authorized by a warrant issued by telephone or other means of telecommunication, the absence of the information or warrant, signed by the justice and carrying on its face a notation of the time, date and place of issuance, is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof that the search or seizure was not authorized by a warrant issued by telephone or other means of telecommunication.

 Marginal note: Duplicates and facsimiles acceptable
 (12)  A duplicate or a facsimile of an information or a warrant has the same probative force as the original for the purposes of subsection (11).

 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 69
 1992, c. 1, ss. 58, 59(E), 60(F)
 1994, c. 44, s. 37

 Marginal note: Where warrant not necessary
 487.11  A peace officer, or a public officer who has been appointed or designated to administer or enforce any federal or provincial law and whose duties include the enforcement of this or any other Act of Parliament, may, in the course of his or her duties, exercise any of the powers described in subsection 487(1) or 492.1(1) without a warrant if the conditions for obtaining a warrant exist but by reason of exigent circumstances it would be impracticable to obtain a warrant.
 1997, c. 18, s. 46

 Marginal note: Restriction on publication
 487.2  If a search warrant is issued under section 487 or 487.1 or a search is made under such a warrant, every one who publishes in any document, or broadcasts or transmits in any way, any information with respect to
 (a)  the location of the place searched or to be searched, or

 (b)  the identity of any person who is or appears to occupy or be in possession or control of that place or who is suspected of being involved in any offence in relation to which the warrant was issued,

 without the consent of every person referred to in paragraph (b) is, unless a charge has been laid in respect of any offence in relation to which the warrant was issued, guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 69
 2005, c. 32, s. 16

 Marginal note: Order denying access to information used to obtain a warrant or production order
 487.3   (1)  A judge or justice may, on application made at the time of issuing a warrant under this or any other Act of Parliament or a production order under section 487.012 or 487.013, or of granting an authorization to enter a dwelling-house under section 529 or an authorization under section 529.4 or at any time thereafter, make an order prohibiting access to and the disclosure of any information relating to the warrant, production order or authorization on the ground that
 (a)  the ends of justice would be subverted by the disclosure for one of the reasons referred to in subsection (2) or the information might be used for an improper purpose; and

 (b)  the ground referred to in paragraph (a) outweighs in importance the access to the information.

 Marginal note: Reasons
 (2)  For the purposes of paragraph (1)(a), an order may be made under subsection (1) on the ground that the ends of justice would be subverted by the disclosure
 (a)  if disclosure of the information would
 (i)  compromise the identity of a confidential informant,

 (ii)  compromise the nature and extent of an ongoing investigation,

 (iii)  endanger a person engaged in particular intelligence-gathering techniques and thereby prejudice future investigations in which similar techniques would be used, or

 (iv)  prejudice the interests of an innocent person; and

 (b)  for any other sufficient reason.

 Marginal note: Procedure
 (3)  Where an order is made under subsection (1), all documents relating to the application shall, subject to any terms and conditions that the justice or judge considers desirable in the circumstances, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any term or condition concerning the duration of the prohibition, partial disclosure of a document, deletion of any information or the occurrence of a condition, be placed in a packet and sealed by the justice or judge immediately on determination of the application, and that packet shall be kept in the custody of the court in a place to which the public has no access or in any other place that the justice or judge may authorize and shall not be dealt with except in accordance with the terms and conditions specified in the order or as varied under subsection (4).

 Marginal note: Application for variance of order
 (4)  An application to terminate the order or vary any of its terms and conditions may be made to the justice or judge who made the order or a judge of the court before which any proceedings arising out of the investigation in relation to which the warrant or production order was obtained may be held.

 1997, c. 23, s. 14, c. 39, s. 1
 2004, c. 3, s. 8

 Marginal note: Execution of search warrant
 488  A warrant issued under section 487 or 487.1 shall be executed by day, unless
 (a)  the justice is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for it to be executed by night;

 (b)  the reasonable grounds are included in the information; and

 (c)  the warrant authorizes that it be executed by night.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 488
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 70
 1997, c. 18, s. 47

 Marginal note: Definitions
 488.1   (1)  In this section,
 custodian custodian  means a person in whose custody a package is placed pursuant to subsection (2); ( gardien )
 document document , for the purposes of this section, has the same meaning as in section 321; ( document )
 judge judge  means a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction of the province where the seizure was made; ( juge )
 lawyer lawyer  means, in the Province of Quebec, an advocate, lawyer or notary and, in any other province, a barrister or solicitor; ( avocat )
 officer officer  means a peace officer or public officer. ( fonctionnaire )

 Marginal note: Examination or seizure of certain documents where privilege claimed
 (2)  Where an officer acting under the authority of this or any other Act of Parliament is about to examine, copy or seize a document in the possession of a lawyer who claims that a named client of his has a solicitor-client privilege in respect of that document, the officer shall, without examining or making copies of the document,
 (a)  seize the document and place it in a package and suitably seal and identify the package; and

 (b)  place the package in the custody of the sheriff of the district or county in which the seizure was made or, if there is agreement in writing that a specified person act as custodian, in the custody of that person.

 Marginal note: Application to judge
 (3)  Where a document has been seized and placed in custody under subsection (2), the Attorney General or the client or the lawyer on behalf of the client, may
 (a)  within fourteen days from the day the document was so placed in custody, apply, on two days notice of motion to all other persons entitled to make application, to a judge for an order
 (i)  appointing a place and a day, not later than twenty-one days after the date of the order, for the determination of the question whether the document should be disclosed, and

 (ii)  requiring the custodian to produce the document to the judge at that time and place;

 (b)  serve a copy of the order on all other persons entitled to make application and on the custodian within six days of the date on which it was made; and

 (c)  if he has proceeded as authorized by paragraph (b), apply, at the appointed time and place, for an order determining the question.

 Marginal note: Disposition of application
 (4)  On an application under paragraph (3)(c), the judge
 (a)  may, if the judge considers it necessary to determine the question whether the document should be disclosed, inspect the document;

 (b)  where the judge is of the opinion that it would materially assist him in deciding whether or not the document is privileged, may allow the Attorney General to inspect the document;

 (c)  shall allow the Attorney General and the person who objects to the disclosure of the document to make representations; and

 (d)  shall determine the question summarily and,
 (i)  if the judge is of the opinion that the document should not be disclosed, ensure that it is repackaged and resealed and order the custodian to deliver the document to the lawyer who claimed the solicitor-client privilege or to the client, or

 (ii)  if the judge is of the opinion that the document should be disclosed, order the custodian to deliver the document to the officer who seized the document or some other person designated by the Attorney General, subject to such restrictions or conditions as the judge deems appropriate,

 and shall, at the same time, deliver concise reasons for the determination in which the nature of the document is described without divulging the details thereof.

 Marginal note: Privilege continues
 (5)  Where the judge determines pursuant to paragraph (4)(d) that a solicitor-client privilege exists in respect of a document, whether or not the judge has, pursuant to paragraph (4)(b), allowed the Attorney General to inspect the document, the document remains privileged and inadmissible as evidence unless the client consents to its admission in evidence or the privilege is otherwise lost.

 Marginal note: Order to custodian to deliver
 (6)  Where a document has been seized and placed in custody under subsection (2) and a judge, on the application of the Attorney General, is satisfied that no application has been made under paragraph (3)(a) or that following such an application no further application has been made under paragraph (3)(c), the judge shall order the custodian to deliver the document to the officer who seized the document or to some other person designated by the Attorney General.

 Marginal note: Application to another judge
 (7)  Where the judge to whom an application has been made under paragraph (3)(c) cannot act or continue to act under this section for any reason, subsequent applications under that paragraph may be made to another judge.

 Marginal note: Prohibition
 (8)  No officer shall examine, make copies of or seize any document without affording a reasonable opportunity for a claim of solicitor-client privilege to be made under subsection (2).

 Marginal note: Authority to make copies
 (9)  At any time while a document is in the custody of a custodian under this section, a judge may, on an ex parte application of a person claiming a solicitor-client privilege under this section, authorize that person to examine the document or make a copy of it in the presence of the custodian or the judge, but any such authorization shall contain provisions to ensure that the document is repackaged and that the package is resealed without alteration or damage.

 Marginal note: Hearing in private
 (10)  An application under paragraph (3)(c) shall be heard in private.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (11)  This section does not apply in circumstances where a claim of solicitor-client privilege may be made under the Income Tax Act or under the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act .

 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 71
 2000, c. 17, s. 89
 2001, c. 41, s. 80

 Marginal note: Seizure of things not specified
 489   (1)  Every person who executes a warrant may seize, in addition to the things mentioned in the warrant, any thing that the person believes on reasonable grounds
 (a)  has been obtained by the commission of an offence against this or any other Act of Parliament;

 (b)  has been used in the commission of an offence against this or any other Act of Parliament; or

 (c)  will afford evidence in respect of an offence against this or any other Act of Parliament.

 Marginal note: Seizure without warrant
 (2)  Every peace officer, and every public officer who has been appointed or designated to administer or enforce any federal or provincial law and whose duties include the enforcement of this or any other Act of Parliament, who is lawfully present in a place pursuant to a warrant or otherwise in the execution of duties may, without a warrant, seize any thing that the officer believes on reasonable grounds
 (a)  has been obtained by the commission of an offence against this or any other Act of Parliament;

 (b)  has been used in the commission of an offence against this or any other Act of Parliament; or

 (c)  will afford evidence in respect of an offence against this or any other Act of Parliament.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 489
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 72, c. 42 (4th Supp.), s. 3
 1993, c. 40, s. 16
 1997, c. 18, s. 48

 Marginal note: Restitution of property or report by peace officer
 489.1   (1)  Subject to this or any other Act of Parliament, where a peace officer has seized anything under a warrant issued under this Act or under section 487.11 or 489 or otherwise in the execution of duties under this or any other Act of Parliament, the peace officer shall, as soon as is practicable,
 (a)  where the peace officer is satisfied,
 (i)  that there is no dispute as to who is lawfully entitled to possession of the thing seized, and

 (ii)  that the continued detention of the thing seized is not required for the purposes of any investigation or a preliminary inquiry, trial or other proceeding,

 return the thing seized, on being issued a receipt therefor, to the person lawfully entitled to its possession and report to the justice who issued the warrant or some other justice for the same territorial division or, if no warrant was issued, a justice having jurisdiction in respect of the matter, that he has done so; or

 (b)  where the peace officer is not satisfied as described in subparagraphs (a)(i) and (ii),
 (i)  bring the thing seized before the justice referred to in paragraph (a), or

 (ii)  report to the justice that he has seized the thing and is detaining it or causing it to be detained

 to be dealt with by the justice in accordance with subsection 490(1).

 Marginal note: Restitution of property or report by peace officer
 (2)  Subject to this or any other Act of Parliament, where a person, other than a peace officer, has seized anything under a warrant issued under this Act or under section 487.11 or 489 or otherwise in the execution of duties under this or any other Act of Parliament, that person shall, as soon as is practicable,
 (a)  bring the thing seized before the justice who issued the warrant or some other justice for the same territorial division or, if no warrant was issued, before a justice having jurisdiction in respect of the matter, or

 (b)  report to the justice referred to in paragraph (a) that he has seized the thing and is detaining it or causing it to be detained,

 to be dealt with by the justice in accordance with subsection 490(1).

 Marginal note: Form
 (3)  A report to a justice under this section shall be in the form set out as Form 5.2 in Part XXVIII, varied to suit the case and shall include, in the case of a report in respect of a warrant issued by telephone or other means of telecommunication, the statements referred to in subsection 487.1(9).

 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 72
 1993, c. 40, s. 17
 1997, c. 18, s. 49

 Marginal note: Detention of things seized
 490   (1)  Subject to this or any other Act of Parliament, where, pursuant to paragraph 489.1(1)(b) or subsection 489.1(2), anything that has been seized is brought before a justice or a report in respect of anything seized is made to a justice, the justice shall,
 (a)  where the lawful owner or person who is lawfully entitled to possession of the thing seized is known, order it to be returned to that owner or person, unless the prosecutor, or the peace officer or other person having custody of the thing seized, satisfies the justice that the detention of the thing seized is required for the purposes of any investigation or a preliminary inquiry, trial or other proceeding; or

 (b)  where the prosecutor, or the peace officer or other person having custody of the thing seized, satisfies the justice that the thing seized should be detained for a reason set out in paragraph (a), detain the thing seized or order that it be detained, taking reasonable care to ensure that it is preserved until the conclusion of any investigation or until it is required to be produced for the purposes of a preliminary inquiry, trial or other proceeding.

 Marginal note: Further detention
 (2)  Nothing shall be detained under the authority of paragraph (1)(b) for a period of more than three months after the day of the seizure, or any longer period that ends when an application made under paragraph (a) is decided, unless
 (a)  a justice, on the making of a summary application to him after three clear days notice thereof to the person from whom the thing detained was seized, is satisfied that, having regard to the nature of the investigation, its further detention for a specified period is warranted and the justice so orders; or

 (b)  proceedings are instituted in which the thing detained may be required.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (3)  More than one order for further detention may be made under paragraph (2)(a) but the cumulative period of detention shall not exceed one year from the day of the seizure, or any longer period that ends when an application made under paragraph (a) is decided, unless
 (a)  a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a judge as defined in section 552, on the making of a summary application to him after three clear days notice thereof to the person from whom the thing detained was seized, is satisfied, having regard to the complex nature of the investigation, that the further detention of the thing seized is warranted for a specified period and subject to such other conditions as the judge considers just, and the judge so orders; or

 (b)  proceedings are instituted in which the thing detained may be required.

 Marginal note: Detention without application where consent
 (3.1)  A thing may be detained under paragraph (1)(b) for any period, whether or not an application for an order under subsection (2) or (3) is made, if the lawful owner or person who is lawfully entitled to possession of the thing seized consents in writing to its detention for that period.

 Marginal note: When accused ordered to stand trial
 (4)  When an accused has been ordered to stand trial, the justice shall forward anything detained pursuant to subsections (1) to (3) to the clerk of the court to which the accused has been ordered to stand trial to be detained by the clerk of the court and disposed of as the court directs.

 Marginal note: Where continued detention no longer required
 (5)  Where at any time before the expiration of the periods of detention provided for or ordered under subsections (1) to (3) in respect of anything seized, the prosecutor, or the peace officer or other person having custody of the thing seized, determines that the continued detention of the thing seized is no longer required for any purpose mentioned in subsection (1) or (4), the prosecutor, peace officer or other person shall apply to
 (a)  a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a judge as defined in section 552, where a judge ordered its detention under subsection (3), or

 (b)  a justice, in any other case,

 who shall, after affording the person from whom the thing was seized or the person who claims to be the lawful owner thereof or person entitled to its possession, if known, an opportunity to establish that he is lawfully entitled to the possession thereof, make an order in respect of the property under subsection (9).

 Marginal note: Idem
 (6)  Where the periods of detention provided for or ordered under subsections (1) to (3) in respect of anything seized have expired and proceedings have not been instituted in which the thing detained may be required, the prosecutor, peace officer or other person shall apply to a judge or justice referred to in paragraph (5)(a) or (b) in the circumstances set out in that paragraph, for an order in respect of the property under subsection (9) or (9.1).

 Marginal note: Application for order of return
 (7)  A person from whom anything has been seized may, after the expiration of the periods of detention provided for or ordered under subsections (1) to (3) and on three clear days notice to the Attorney General, apply summarily to
 (a)  a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a judge as defined in section 552, where a judge ordered the detention of the thing seized under subsection (3), or

 (b)  a justice, in any other case,

 for an order under paragraph (9)(c) that the thing seized be returned to the applicant.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (8)  A judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a judge as defined in section 552, where a judge ordered the detention of the thing seized under subsection (3), or a justice, in any other case, may allow an application to be made under subsection (7) prior to the expiration of the periods referred to therein where he is satisfied that hardship will result unless the application is so allowed.

 Marginal note: Disposal of things seized
 (9)  Subject to this or any other Act of Parliament, if
 (a)  a judge referred to in subsection (7), where a judge ordered the detention of anything seized under subsection (3), or

 (b)  a justice, in any other case,

 is satisfied that the periods of detention provided for or ordered under subsections (1) to (3) in respect of anything seized have expired and proceedings have not been instituted in which the thing detained may be required or, where those periods have not expired, that the continued detention of the thing seized will not be required for any purpose mentioned in subsection (1) or (4), he shall
 (c)  if possession of it by the person from whom it was seized is lawful, order it to be returned to that person, or

 (d)  if possession of it by the person from whom it was seized is unlawful and the lawful owner or person who is lawfully entitled to its possession is known, order it to be returned to the lawful owner or to the person who is lawfully entitled to its possession,

 and may, if possession of it by the person from whom it was seized is unlawful, or if it was seized when it was not in the possession of any person, and the lawful owner or person who is lawfully entitled to its possession is not known, order it to be forfeited to Her Majesty, to be disposed of as the Attorney General directs, or otherwise dealt with in accordance with the law.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (9.1)  Notwithstanding subsection (9), a judge or justice referred to in paragraph (9)(a) or (b) may, if the periods of detention provided for or ordered under subsections (1) to (3) in respect of a thing seized have expired but proceedings have not been instituted in which the thing may be required, order that the thing continue to be detained for such period as the judge or justice considers necessary if the judge or justice is satisfied
 (a)  that the continued detention of the thing might reasonably be required for a purpose mentioned in subsection (1) or (4); and

 (b)  that it is in the interests of justice to do so.

 Marginal note: Application by lawful owner
 (10)  Subject to this or any other Act of Parliament, a person, other than a person who may make an application under subsection (7), who claims to be the lawful owner or person lawfully entitled to possession of anything seized and brought before or reported to a justice under section 489.1 may, at any time, on three clear days notice to the Attorney General and the person from whom the thing was seized, apply summarily to
 (a)  a judge referred to in subsection (7), where a judge ordered the detention of the thing seized under subsection (3), or

 (b)  a justice, in any other case,

 for an order that the thing detained be returned to the applicant.

 Marginal note: Order
 (11)  Subject to this or any other Act of Parliament, on an application under subsection (10), where a judge or justice is satisfied that
 (a)  the applicant is the lawful owner or lawfully entitled to possession of the thing seized, and

 (b)  the periods of detention provided for or ordered under subsections (1) to (3) in respect of the thing seized have expired and proceedings have not been instituted in which the thing detained may be required or, where such periods have not expired, that the continued detention of the thing seized will not be required for any purpose mentioned in subsection (1) or (4),

 the judge or justice shall order that
 (c)  the thing seized be returned to the applicant, or

 (d)  except as otherwise provided by law, where, pursuant to subsection (9), the thing seized was forfeited, sold or otherwise dealt with in such a manner that it cannot be returned to the applicant, the applicant be paid the proceeds of sale or the value of the thing seized.

 Marginal note: Detention pending appeal, etc.
 (12)  Notwithstanding anything in this section, nothing shall be returned, forfeited or disposed of under this section pending any application made, or appeal taken, thereunder in respect of the thing or proceeding in which the right of seizure thereof is questioned or within thirty days after an order in respect of the thing is made under this section.

 Marginal note: Copies of documents returned
 (13)  The Attorney General, the prosecutor or the peace officer or other person having custody of a document seized may, before bringing it before a justice or complying with an order that the document be returned, forfeited or otherwise dealt with under subsection (1), (9) or (11), make or cause to be made, and may retain, a copy of the document.

 Marginal note: Probative force
 (14)  Every copy made under subsection (13) that is certified as a true copy by the Attorney General, the person who made the copy or the person in whose presence the copy was made is admissible in evidence and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, has the same probative force as the original document would have if it had been proved in the ordinary way.

 Marginal note: Access to anything seized
 (15)  Where anything is detained pursuant to subsections (1) to (3.1), a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction, a judge as defined in section 552 or a provincial court judge may, on summary application on behalf of a person who has an interest in what is detained, after three clear days notice to the Attorney General, order that the person by or on whose behalf the application is made be permitted to examine anything so detained.

 Marginal note: Conditions
 (16)  An order that is made under subsection (15) shall be made on such terms as appear to the judge to be necessary or desirable to ensure that anything in respect of which the order is made is safeguarded and preserved for any purpose for which it may subsequently be required.

 Marginal note: Appeal
 (17)  A person who feels aggrieved by an order made under subsection (8), (9), (9.1) or (11) may appeal from the order to the appeal court, as defined in section 812, and for the purposes of the appeal the provisions of sections 814 to 828 apply with such modifications as the circumstances require.

 Marginal note: Waiver of notice
 (18)  Any person to whom three days notice must be given under paragraph (2)(a) or (3)(a) or subsection (7), (10) or (15) may agree that the application for which the notice is given be made before the expiration of the three days.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 490
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 73
 1994, c. 44, s. 38
 1997, c. 18, s. 50

 Marginal note: Perishable things
 490.01  Where any thing seized pursuant to this Act is perishable or likely to depreciate rapidly, the person who seized the thing or any other person having custody of the thing
 (a)  may return it to its lawful owner or the person who is lawfully entitled to possession of it; or

 (b)  where, on ex parte application to a justice, the justice so authorizes, may
 (i)  dispose of it and give the proceeds of disposition to the lawful owner of the thing seized, if the lawful owner was not a party to an offence in relation to the thing or, if the identity of that lawful owner cannot be reasonably ascertained, the proceeds of disposition are forfeited to Her Majesty, or

 (ii)  destroy it.

 1997, c. 18, s. 51
 1999, c. 5, s. 17

 Sex Offender Information
 Interpretation
 Marginal note: Definitions
 490.011   (1)  The following definitions apply in this section and in sections 490.012 to 490.032.
 crime of a sexual nature
 crimes de nature sexuelle
 crime of a sexual nature means a crime referred to in subsection 3(2) of the Sex Offender Information Registration Act . ( crimes de nature sexuelle )
 database
 banque de données
 database has the same meaning as in subsection 3(1) of the Sex Offender Information Registration Act . ( banque de données )
 designated offence
 infraction désignée
 designated offence means
 (a)  an offence under any of the following provisions:
 (i)  subsection 7(4.1) (offence in relation to sexual offences against children),

 (ii)  section 151 (sexual interference),

 (iii)  section 152 (invitation to sexual touching),

 (iv)  section 153 (sexual exploitation),

 (v)  section 153.1 (sexual exploitation of person with disability),

 (vi)  section 155 (incest),

 (vii)  subsection 160(3) (bestiality in presence of or by a child),

 (viii)  section 163.1 (child pornography),

 (ix)  section 170 (parent or guardian procuring sexual activity),

 (x)  section 172.1 (luring a child by means of a computer system),

 (xi)  subsection 173(2) (exposure),

 (xii)  paragraph 212(1)(i) (stupefying or overpowering for the purpose of sexual intercourse),

 (xiii)  subsection 212(2) (living on the avails of prostitution of a person under age of eighteen),

 (xiv)  subsection 212(2.1) (aggravated offence — living on the avails of prostitution of a person under age of eighteen),

 (xv)  subsection 212(4) (obtaining prostitution of person under age of eighteen),

 (xvi)  section 271 (sexual assault),

 (xvii)  section 272 (sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm),

 (xviii)  paragraph 273(2)(a) (aggravated sexual assault — use of a firearm),

 (xix)  paragraph 273(2)(b) (aggravated sexual assault), and

 (xx)  subsection 273.3(2) (removal of a child from Canada);

 (b)  an offence under any of the following provisions:
 (i)  subsection 173(1) (indecent acts),

 (ii)  section 177 (trespassing at night),

 (iii)  section 230 (murder in commission of offences),

 (iv)  section 234 (manslaughter),

 (v)  paragraph 246(b) (overcoming resistance to commission of offence),

 (vi)  section 264 (criminal harassment),

 (vii)  section 279 (kidnapping),

 (vii.1)  section 279.01 (trafficking in persons),

 (viii)  section 280 (abduction of a person under age of sixteen),

 (ix)  section 281 (abduction of a person under age of fourteen),

 (x)  paragraph 348(1)(d) (breaking and entering a dwelling house with intent to commit an indictable offence),

 (xi)  paragraph 348(1)(d) (breaking and entering a dwelling house and committing an indictable offence),

 (xii)  paragraph 348(1)(e) (breaking and entering a place other than a dwelling house with intent to commit an indictable offence), and

 (xiii)  paragraph 348(1)(e) (breaking and entering a place other than a dwelling house and committing an indictable offence);

 (c)  an offence under any of the following provisions of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as they read from time to time before January 4, 1983:
 (i)  section 144 (rape),

 (ii)  section 145 (attempt to commit rape),

 (iii)  section 149 (indecent assault on female),

 (iv)  section 156 (indecent assault on male), and

 (v)  subsection 246(1) (assault with intent);

 (d)  an offence under any of the following provisions of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as they read from time to time before January 1, 1988:
 (i)  subsection 146(1) (sexual intercourse with a female under age of fourteen),

 (ii)  subsection 146(2) (sexual intercourse with a female between ages of fourteen and sixteen),

 (iii)  section 153 (sexual intercourse with step-daughter),

 (iv)  section 157 (gross indecency),

 (v)  section 166 (parent or guardian procuring defilement), and

 (vi)  section 167 (householder permitting defilement);

 (e)  an attempt or conspiracy to commit an offence referred to in any of paragraphs (a), (c) and (d); or

 (f)  an attempt or conspiracy to commit an offence referred to in paragraph (b). ( infraction désignée )

 Ontario Act
 loi ontarienne
 Ontario Act means Christopher’s Law (Sex Offender Registry), 2000 , S.O. 2000, c. 1. ( loi ontarienne )
 pardon
 réhabilitation
 pardon means a pardon granted by any authority under law, other than a free pardon granted under Her Majesty’s royal prerogative of mercy or under section 748, that has not ceased to have effect or been revoked. ( réhabilitation )
 registration centre
 bureau d’inscription
 registration centre has the same meaning as in subsection 3(1) of the Sex Offender Information Registration Act . ( bureau d’inscription )
 Review Board
 commission d’examen
 Review Board means the Review Board established or designated for a province under subsection 672.38(1). ( commission d’examen )
 verdict of not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder
 verdict de non-responsabilité
 verdict of not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder has the same meaning as in section 672.1. ( verdict de non-responsabilité )

 Marginal note: Interpretation
 (2)  For the purpose of this section and sections 490.012 to 490.032, a person who is convicted of, or found not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder for, a designated offence does not include a young person
 (a)  within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Youth Criminal Justice Act unless they are given an adult sentence within the meaning of that subsection for the offence; or

 (b)  within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Young Offenders Act , chapter Y-1 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1985, unless they are convicted of the offence in ordinary court within the meaning of that subsection.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20
 2005, c. 43, s. 6

 Order to Comply with Registration Requirements
 Marginal note: Order
 490.012   (1)  A court shall, on application of the prosecutor, make an order in Form 52 requiring a person to comply with the Sex Offender Information Registration Act for the applicable period specified in subsection 490.013(2), (3) or (4) as soon as possible after it imposes a sentence on the person for an offence referred to in paragraph (a), (c), (d) or (e) of the definition designated offence in subsection 490.011(1), or renders a verdict of not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder for such an offence.

 Marginal note: Order
 (2)  A court shall, on application of the prosecutor, make an order in Form 52 requiring a person to comply with the Sex Offender Information Registration Act for the applicable period specified in subsection 490.013(2), (3) or (4) as soon as possible after it imposes a sentence on the person for an offence referred to in paragraph (b) or (f) of the definition designated offence in subsection 490.011(1), if the prosecutor establishes beyond a reasonable doubt that the person committed the offence with the intent to commit an offence referred to in paragraph (a), (c), (d) or (e) of that definition.

 Marginal note: Order
 (3)  A court shall, on application of the prosecutor, make an order in Form 52 requiring a person in respect of whom an order may be made under subsection (1) or (2) to comply with the Sex Offender Information Registration Act for the applicable period specified in subsection 490.013(5), as soon as possible after it imposes a sentence on the person for a designated offence or renders a verdict of not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder for such an offence, if the prosecutor establishes that
 (a)  the person was, before or after the coming into force of that Act, previously convicted of, or found not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder for, an offence referred to in paragraph (a), (c), (d) or (e) of the definition designated offence in subsection 490.011(1);

 (b)  the person is not, and was not at any time, subject to an obligation under section 490.019; and

 (c)  no order was made under subsection (1) in connection with the previous offence.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (4)  The court is not required to make an order under this section if it is satisfied that the person has established that, if the order were made, the impact on them, including on their privacy or liberty, would be grossly disproportionate to the public interest in protecting society through the effective investigation of crimes of a sexual nature, to be achieved by the registration of information relating to sex offenders under the Sex Offender Information Registration Act .

 Marginal note: Reasons for decision
 (5)  The court shall give reasons for its decision.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Date order begins
 490.013   (1)  An order made under section 490.012 begins on the day on which it is made.

 Marginal note: Duration of order
 (2)  An order made under subsection 490.012(1) or (2)
 (a)  ends 10 years after it was made if the offence in connection with which it was made was prosecuted summarily or is an offence for which the maximum term of imprisonment is two or five years;

 (b)  ends 20 years after it was made if the offence in connection with which it was made is one for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 or 14 years; and

 (c)  applies to the person for life if the offence in connection with which it was made is one for which the maximum term of imprisonment is life.

 Marginal note: Duration of order
 (3)  An order made under subsection 490.012(1) or (2) applies to a person for life if they are, or were at any time, subject to an obligation under section 490.019.

 Marginal note: Duration of order
 (4)  An order made under subsection 490.012(1) or (2) applies to a person for life if they are, or were at any time, subject to an order made previously under either of those subsections.

 Marginal note: Duration of order
 (5)  An order made under subsection 490.012(3) applies to a person for life.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Appeal
 490.014  The prosecutor, or a person who is subject to an order under section 490.012, may appeal from a decision of the court under that section on any ground of appeal that raises a question of law or of mixed law and fact. The appeal court may dismiss the appeal, or allow it and order a new hearing, quash the order or make an order that may be made under that section.
 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Application for termination order
 490.015   (1)  A person who is subject to an order may apply for a termination order
 (a)  not earlier than five years after the order was made, in the case of an order that is applicable for 10 years under paragraph 490.013(2)(a);

 (b)  not earlier than 10 years after the order was made, in the case of an order that is applicable for 20 years under paragraph 490.013(2)(b);

 (c)  not earlier than 20 years after the order was made, in the case of an order that is applicable for life under paragraph 490.013(2)(c) or subsection 490.013(3) or (5); or

 (d)  on or after the day on which they receive a pardon.

 Marginal note: Application for termination of multiple orders
 (2)  If more than one order is made in respect of a person, the person may apply for a termination order not earlier than 20 years after the most recent order was made under section 490.012, or on or after the day on which they receive a pardon. The application must be in relation to every order that is in effect.

 Marginal note: Person subject to obligation
 (3)  If an applicant is also subject to an obligation under section 490.019, the application must be in relation to that obligation as well as to every order that is in effect.

 Marginal note: Re-application
 (4)  A person whose application is refused may re-apply not earlier than five years after they made the previous application. However, they may not re-apply under this subsection if an order is made with respect to them under section 490.012 after the previous application was made.

 Marginal note: Court to which application is made
 (5)  A person must apply to a superior court of criminal jurisdiction under this section if such a court made an order to which the application relates. In any other case, they must apply to a court of criminal jurisdiction.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Termination order
 490.016   (1)  The court shall make a termination order if it is satisfied that the person has established that the impact on them of continuing the order or orders, and any obligation, to which the application relates, including on their privacy or liberty, would be grossly disproportionate to the public interest in the protection of society through the effective investigation of crimes of a sexual nature, to be achieved by the registration of information relating to sex offenders under the Sex Offender Information Registration Act .

 Marginal note: Reasons for decision
 (2)  The court shall give reasons for its decision.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Appeal
 490.017  The prosecutor or the person who applied for a termination order may appeal from a decision made under subsection 490.016(1) on any ground of appeal that raises a question of law or of mixed law and fact. The appeal court may dismiss the appeal, or allow it and order a new hearing, quash the termination order or make an order that may be made under that subsection.
 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Requirements relating to notice
 490.018   (1)  When a court or appeal court makes an order under section 490.012, it shall cause
 (a)  the order to be read by or to the person who is subject to it;

 (b)  a copy of the order to be given to that person;

 (c)  that person to be informed of sections 4 to 7 and subsection 17(1) of the Sex Offender Information Registration Act and section 490.031; and

 (d)  a copy of the order to be sent to
 (i)  the Review Board that is responsible for making a disposition with respect to that person, if applicable,

 (ii)  the person in charge of the place in which that person is to serve the custodial portion of a sentence or is to be detained in custody as part of a disposition under Part XX.1, if applicable, and

 (iii)  the police service whose member charged that person with the offence in connection with which the order is made.

 Marginal note: Endorsement
 (2)  After paragraphs (1)(a) to (c) have been complied with, the person who is subject to the order shall endorse the order.

 Marginal note: Notice on disposition by Review Board
 (3)  A Review Board shall cause a copy of the order to be given to the person who is subject to it when it directs
 (a)  under paragraph 672.54(a), that the person be discharged absolutely; or

 (b)  under paragraph 672.54(b), that the person be discharged subject to conditions, unless the conditions restrict the person’s liberty in a manner and to an extent that prevent them from complying with section 4, 4.1, 4.3 or 6 of the Sex Offender Information Registration Act .

 Marginal note: Notice before release
 (4)  The person in charge of the place in which the person is serving the custodial portion of a sentence, or is detained in custody, before their release or discharge shall give the person a copy of the order not earlier than 10 days before their release or discharge.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Obligation to Comply with Registration Requirements
 Marginal note: Obligation to comply
 490.019  A person who is served with a notice in Form 53 shall comply with the Sex Offender Information Registration Act for the applicable period specified in section 490.022 unless a court makes an exemption order under subsection 490.023(2).
 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Persons who may be served
 490.02   (1)  The Attorney General of a province or minister of justice of a territory may serve a person with a notice only if the person was convicted of, or found not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder for, an offence referred to in paragraph (a), (c), (d) or (e) of the definition designated offence in subsection 490.011(1) and
 (a)  on the day on which the Sex Offender Information Registration Act comes into force, they are subject to a sentence for, or have not received an absolute discharge under Part XX.1 from, the offence; or

 (b)  in any other case,
 (i)  their name appears in connection with the offence, immediately before the Sex Offender Information Registration Act comes into force, in the sex offender registry established under the Ontario Act, and

 (ii)  they either were a resident of Ontario at any time between April 23, 2001 and the day on which the Sex Offender Information Registration Act comes into force or committed the offence in Ontario.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (2)  A notice shall not be served on a person
 (a)  referred to in paragraph (1)(a) or (b) if they have been finally acquitted of, or have received a free pardon granted under Her Majesty’s royal prerogative of mercy or section 748 for, every offence in connection with which notice may be served on them under that paragraph;

 (b)  referred to in paragraph (1)(a) or (b) if an application has been made for an order under subsection 490.012(3) in relation to any offence in connection with which notice may be served on them under that paragraph; or

 (c)  referred to in paragraph (1)(b) if they have provided proof of a pardon in accordance with subsection 9(1) of the Ontario Act.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Period for and method of service
 490.021   (1)  The notice shall be personally served within one year after the day on which the Sex Offender Information Registration Act comes into force.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (2)  If a person referred to in paragraph 490.02(1)(a) is unlawfully at large or is in breach of any terms of their sentence or discharge, or conditions set under this Act, that relate to residence, the notice may be served by registered mail at their last known address.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (3)  If a person referred to in paragraph 490.02(1)(b) is not in compliance with section 3 of the Ontario Act on the day on which the Sex Offender Information Registration Act comes into force, the notice may be served by registered mail at their last known address.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (4)  If a person referred to in paragraph 490.02(1)(b) is in compliance with section 3 and subsection 7(2) of the Ontario Act on the day on which the Sex Offender Information Registration Act comes into force but fails to comply with subsection 3(1) or 7(2) of the Ontario Act within one year after that day, the notice shall be served within one year after the day on which they failed to comply and may be served by registered mail at their last known address.

 Marginal note: Proof of service
 (5)  An affidavit of the person who served the notice, sworn before a commissioner or other person authorized to take affidavits, is evidence of the service and the notice if it sets out that
 (a)  the person who served the notice has charge of the appropriate records and has knowledge of the facts in the particular case;

 (b)  the notice was personally served on, or mailed to, the person to whom it was directed on a named day; and

 (c)  the person who served the notice identifies a true copy of the notice as an exhibit attached to the affidavit.

 Marginal note: Requirements relating to notice
 (6)  The person who served the notice shall, without delay, send a copy of the affidavit and the notice to the Attorney General of the province, or the minister of justice of the territory, in which the person was served.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Date obligation begins
 490.022   (1)  The obligation under section 490.019 begins
 (a)  either one year after the day on which a person is served with a notice under section 490.021 or when a court decides not to make an exemption order under subsection 490.023(2), whichever is later; or

 (b)  when an exemption order made under this Act is quashed.

 Marginal note: Date obligation ends
 (2)  The obligation ends on the earliest of
 (a)  the day on which an exemption order is made on an appeal from a decision made under subsection 490.023(2),

 (b)  the day on which the obligation of a person referred to in paragraph 490.02(1)(b) to comply with section 3 of the Ontario Act ends under paragraph 7(1)(a) of that Act, or

 (c)  the day on which a person referred to in paragraph 490.02(1)(b) provides satisfactory proof of a pardon to a person who collects information, within the meaning of subsection 3(1) of the Sex Offender Information Registration Act , at a registration centre.

 Marginal note: Duration of obligation
 (3)  If none of paragraphs (2)(a) to (c) applies earlier, the obligation
 (a)  ends 10 years after the day on which the person was sentenced, or found not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder, for an offence to which the obligation relates that was prosecuted summarily or for which the maximum term of imprisonment is two or five years;

 (b)  ends 20 years after the day on which the person was sentenced, or found not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder, for an offence to which the obligation relates and for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 or 14 years;

 (c)  applies for life if the maximum term of imprisonment for an offence to which the obligation relates is life; or

 (d)  applies for life if the person was convicted of, or found not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder for, more than one offence referred to in paragraph (a), (c), (d) or (e) of the definition designated offence in subsection 490.011(1).

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Application for exemption order
 490.023   (1)  A person who is not subject to an order under section 490.012 may, within one year after the day on which they are served with a notice under section 490.021, apply to any court of criminal jurisdiction for an order exempting them from the obligation under section 490.019.

 Marginal note: Exemption order
 (2)  The court shall make an exemption order if it is satisfied that the person has established that the impact of the obligation on them, including on their privacy or liberty, would be grossly disproportionate to the public interest in protecting society through the effective investigation of crimes of a sexual nature, to be achieved by the registration of information relating to sex offenders under the Sex Offender Information Registration Act .

 Marginal note: Reasons for decision
 (3)  The court shall give reasons for its decision.

 Marginal note: Effect of exemption order
 (4)  If the court makes an exemption order, it shall also make an order requiring the permanent removal from the database of all information that relates to the person.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Appeal
 490.024   (1)  The Attorney General or the person who applied for an exemption order may appeal from a decision of the court under subsection 490.023(2) on any ground of appeal that raises a question of law or of mixed law and fact. The appeal court may dismiss the appeal, or allow it and order a new hearing, quash the exemption order or make an order that may be made under that subsection.

 Marginal note: Effect of exemption order
 (2)  If an appeal court makes an exemption order, it shall also make an order requiring the permanent removal from the database of all information that relates to the person.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Requirements relating to notice
 490.025  When a court decides not to make an exemption order under subsection 490.023(2) or an appeal court dismisses an appeal from such a decision or quashes an exemption order made under that subsection, it shall notify the Attorney General of the decision and cause the person who applied for the exemption order to be informed of sections 4 to 7 and subsection 17(1) of the Sex Offender Information Registration Act and section 490.031.
 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Application for termination order
 490.026   (1)  A person who is subject to an obligation under section 490.019 and is not subject to an order under section 490.012 may apply to a court of criminal jurisdiction for a termination order.

 Marginal note: Time for application
 (2)  A person may apply for a termination order under subsection (1) if the following period has elapsed since the day on which they were sentenced, or found not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder, for an offence referred to in paragraph (a), (c), (d) or (e) of the definition designated offence in subsection 490.011(1):
 (a)  five years if the offence was prosecuted summarily or is an offence for which the maximum term of imprisonment is two or five years;

 (b)  10 years if the offence is one for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 or 14 years; and

 (c)  20 years if the offence is one for which the maximum term of imprisonment is life.

 Marginal note: More than one offence
 (3)  A person who committed more than one offence referred to in paragraph (a), (c), (d) or (e) of the definition designated offence in subsection 490.011(1) may apply for a termination order under subsection (1) if 20 years have elapsed since the day on which they were sentenced, or found not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder, for the most recent offence.

 Marginal note: Re-application
 (4)  A person whose application is refused may re-apply if five years have elapsed since the day on which they made the previous application. However, they may not re-apply under this subsection if an order is made with respect to them under section 490.012 after the previous application was made.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Termination order
 490.027   (1)  The court shall make an order terminating the obligation if it is satisfied that the person has established that the impact on them of continuing the obligation, including on their privacy or liberty, would be grossly disproportionate to the public interest in the protection of society through the effective investigation of crimes of a sexual nature, to be achieved by the registration of information relating to sex offenders under the Sex Offender Information Registration Act .

 Marginal note: Reasons for decision
 (2)  The court shall give reasons for its decision.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Deemed application
 490.028  If a person is eligible to apply for both an exemption order under section 490.023 and a termination order under section 490.026 within one year after they are served with a notice under section 490.021, an application within that period for one order is deemed to be an application for both.
 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Marginal note: Appeal
 490.029  The Attorney General or the person who applied for a termination order may appeal from a decision of the court made under section 490.027 on any ground of appeal that raises a question of law or of mixed law and fact. The appeal court may dismiss the appeal, or allow it and order a new hearing, quash the termination order or make an order that may be made under that section.
 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Disclosure of Information
 Marginal note: Disclosure by Commissioner
 490.03   (1)  At the request of a prosecutor or the Attorney General, as the case may be, the Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police shall disclose information that is registered in the database or the fact that such information is registered in the database
 (a)  to the prosecutor, if the Commissioner is satisfied that the disclosure is necessary for the purposes of a proceeding for an order under section 490.012; or

 (b)  to the Attorney General, if the Commissioner is satisfied that the disclosure is necessary for the purposes of a proceeding under section 490.015, 490.023 or 490.026, or an appeal from a decision made in a proceeding under any of those sections or in a proceeding for an order under section 490.012.

 Marginal note: Disclosure by Commissioner
 (2)  At the request of the Attorney General, the Commissioner shall disclose to the Attorney General all information relating to a person that is registered in the database if the person, in connection with a proceeding, discloses any such information or the fact that any such information is registered in the database.

 Marginal note: Disclosure in legal proceedings
 (3)  The prosecutor or the Attorney General may disclose the information to a court in connection with a proceeding referred to in subsection (1) or (2), or to an appeal court in connection with an appeal from a decision made in the proceeding, if the information is relevant to the proceeding or appeal.

 Marginal note: Disclosure in legal proceedings
 (4)  Information that is collected under the Sex Offender Information Registration Act or registered in the database and that is relevant to the proceeding may be disclosed to a judge or justice in a proceeding relating to an application for a search warrant in connection with the investigation of a crime that there are reasonable grounds to suspect is of a sexual nature.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Offences
 Marginal note: Offence
 490.031  Every person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to comply with an order made under section 490.012 or with an obligation under section 490.019, is guilty of an offence and liable
 (a)  in the case of a first offence, on summary conviction, to a fine of not more than $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than six months, or to both; and

 (b)  in the case of a second or subsequent offence,
 (i)  on conviction on indictment, to a fine of not more than $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years, or to both, or

 (ii)  on summary conviction, to a fine of not more than $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than six months, or to both.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Regulations
 Marginal note: Regulations
 490.032  The Governor in Council may make regulations
 (a)  requiring that additional information be contained in a notice under Form 53; and

 (b)  prescribing, for one or more provinces, the form and content of that information.

 2004, c. 10, s. 20

 Forfeiture of Offence-related Property
 Marginal note: Order of forfeiture of property on conviction
 490.1   (1)  Subject to sections 490.3 to 490.41, if a person is convicted of an indictable offence under this Act or the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act and, on application of the Attorney General, the court is satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that any property is offence-related property and that the offence was committed in relation to that property, the court shall
 (a)  where the prosecution of the offence was commenced at the instance of the government of a province and conducted by or on behalf of that government, order that the property be forfeited to Her Majesty in right of that province and disposed of by the Attorney General or Solicitor General of that province in accordance with the law; and

 (b)  in any other case, order that the property be forfeited to Her Majesty in right of Canada and disposed of by the member of the Queen’s Privy Council for Canada that may be designated for the purpose of this paragraph in accordance with the law.

 (1.1)   [Repealed, 2001, c. 41, s. 130]

 Marginal note: Property related to other offences
 (2)  Subject to sections 490.3 to 490.41, if the evidence does not establish to the satisfaction of the court that the indictable offence under this Act or the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act of which a person has been convicted was committed in relation to property in respect of which an order of forfeiture would otherwise be made under subsection (1) but the court is satisfied, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the property is offence-related property, the court may make an order of forfeiture under subsection (1) in relation to that property.

 Marginal note: Property outside Canada
 (2.1)  An order may be issued under this section in respect of property situated outside Canada, with any modifications that the circumstances require.

 Marginal note: Appeal
 (3)  A person who has been convicted of an indictable offence under this Act or the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act , or the Attorney General, may appeal to the court of appeal from an order or a failure to make an order under subsection (1) as if the appeal were an appeal against the sentence imposed on the person in respect of the offence.

 1997, c. 23, s. 15
 2001, c. 32, s. 30, c. 41, ss. 18, 130
 2007, c. 13, s. 8

 Marginal note: Application for in rem forfeiture
 490.2   (1)  If an information has been laid in respect of an indictable offence under this Act or the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act , the Attorney General may make an application to a judge for an order of forfeiture under subsection (2).

 Marginal note: Order of forfeiture of property
 (2)  Subject to sections 490.3 to 490.41, the judge to whom an application is made under subsection (1) shall order that the property that is subject to the application be forfeited and disposed of in accordance with subsection (4) if the judge is satisfied
 (a)  beyond a reasonable doubt that the property is offence-related property;

 (b)  that proceedings in respect of an indictable offence under this Act or the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act in relation to the property were commenced; and

 (c)  that the accused charged with the offence has died or absconded.

 Marginal note: Accused deemed absconded
 (3)  For the purpose of subsection (2), an accused is deemed to have absconded in connection with the indictable offence if
 (a)  an information has been laid alleging the commission of the offence by the accused,

 (b)  a warrant for the arrest of the accused has been issued in relation to that information, and

 (c)  reasonable attempts to arrest the accused under the warrant have been unsuccessful during a period of six months beginning on the day on which the warrant was issued,

 and the accused is deemed to have so absconded on the last day of that six month period.

 Marginal note: Who may dispose of forfeited property
 (4)  For the purpose of subsection (2), the judge shall
 (a)  where the prosecution of the offence was commenced at the instance of the government of a province and conducted by or on behalf of that government, order that the property be forfeited to Her Majesty in right of that province and disposed of by the Attorney General or Solicitor General of that province in accordance with the law; and

 (b)  in any other case, order that the property be forfeited to Her Majesty in right of Canada and disposed of by the member of the Queen’s Privy Council for Canada that may be designated for the purpose of this paragraph in accordance with the law.

 Marginal note: Property outside Canada
 (4.1)  An order may be issued under this section in respect of property situated outside Canada, with any modifications that the circumstances require.

 Definition of judge
 (5)  In this section and sections 490.5 and 490.8, judge means a judge as defined in section 552 or a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction.

 1997, c. 23, s. 15
 2001, c. 32, s. 31
 2007, c. 13, s. 9

 Marginal note: Voidable transfers
 490.3  A court may, before ordering that offence-related property be forfeited under subsection 490.1(1) or 490.2(2), set aside any conveyance or transfer of the property that occurred after the seizure of the property, or the making of a restraint order in respect of the property, unless the conveyance or transfer was for valuable consideration to a person acting in good faith.
 1997, c. 23, s. 15

 Marginal note: Notice
 490.4   (1)  Before making an order under subsection 490.1(1) or 490.2(2) in relation to any property, a court shall require notice in accordance with subsection (2) to be given to, and may hear, any person who, in the opinion of the court, appears to have a valid interest in the property.

 Marginal note: Manner of giving notice
 (2)  A notice given under subsection (1) shall
 (a)  be given or served in the manner that the court directs or that may be specified in the rules of the court;

 (b)  be of any duration that the court considers reasonable or that may be specified in the rules of the court; and

 (c)  set out the offence charged and a description of the property.

 Marginal note: Order of restoration of property
 (3)  A court may order that all or part of the property that would otherwise be forfeited under subsection 490.1(1) or 490.2(2) be returned to a person — other than a person who was charged with an indictable offence under this Act or the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act or a person who acquired title to or a right of possession of the property from such a person under circumstances that give rise to a reasonable inference that the title or right was transferred for the purpose of avoiding the forfeiture of the property — if the court is satisfied that the person is the lawful owner or is lawfully entitled to possession of all or part of that property, and that the person appears innocent of any complicity in, or collusion in relation to, the offence.

 1997, c. 23, s. 15
 2001, c. 32, s. 32
 2007, c. 13, s. 10

 Marginal note: Notice
 490.41   (1)  If all or part of offence-related property that would otherwise be forfeited under subsection 490.1(1) or 490.2(2) is a dwelling-house, before making an order of forfeiture, a court shall require that notice in accordance with subsection (2) be given to, and may hear, any person who resides in the dwelling-house and is a member of the immediate family of the person charged with or convicted of the indictable offence under this Act or the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act in relation to which the property would be forfeited.

 Marginal note: Manner of giving notice
 (2)  A notice shall
 (a)  be given or served in the manner that the court directs or that may be specified in the rules of the court;

 (b)  be of any duration that the court considers reasonable or that may be specified in the rules of the court; and

 (c)  set out the offence charged and a description of the property.

 Marginal note: Non-forfeiture of property
 (3)  Subject to an order made under subsection 490.4(3), if a court is satisfied that the impact of an order of forfeiture made under subsection 490.1(1) or 490.2(2) would be disproportionate to the nature and gravity of the offence, the circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence and the criminal record, if any, of the person charged with or convicted of the offence, as the case may be, it may decide not to order the forfeiture of the property or part of the property and may revoke any restraint order made in respect of that property or part.

 Marginal note: Factors in relation to dwelling-house
 (4)  Where all or part of the property that would otherwise be forfeited under subsection 490.1(1) or 490.2(2) is a dwelling-house, when making a decision under subsection (3), the court shall also consider
 (a)  the impact of an order of forfeiture on any member of the immediate family of the person charged with or convicted of the offence, if the dwelling-house was the member’s principal residence at the time the charge was laid and continues to be the member’s principal residence; and

 (b)  whether the member referred to in paragraph (a) appears innocent of any complicity in the offence or of any collusion in relation to the offence.

 2001, c. 32, s. 33
 2007, c. 13, s. 11

 Marginal note: Application
 490.5   (1)  Where any offence-related property is forfeited to Her Majesty pursuant to an order made under subsection 490.1(1) or 490.2(2), any person who claims an interest in the property, other than
 (a)  in the case of property forfeited pursuant to an order made under subsection 490.1(1), a person who was convicted of the indictable offence in relation to which the property was forfeited,

 (b)  in the case of property forfeited pursuant to an order made under subsection 490.2(2), a person who was charged with the indictable offence in relation to which the property was forfeited, or

 (c)  a person who acquired title to or a right of possession of the property from a person referred to in paragraph (a) or (b) under circumstances that give rise to a reasonable inference that the title or right was transferred from that person for the purpose of avoiding the forfeiture of the property,

 may, within thirty days after the forfeiture, apply by notice in writing to a judge for an order under subsection (4).

 Marginal note: Fixing day for hearing
 (2)  The judge to whom an application is made under subsection (1) shall fix a day not less than thirty days after the date of the filing of the application for the hearing of the application.

 Marginal note: Notice
 (3)  An applicant shall serve a notice of the application made under subsection (1) and of the hearing of it on the Attorney General at least fifteen days before the day fixed for the hearing.

 Marginal note: Order declaring interest not affected by forfeiture
 (4)  Where, on the hearing of an application made under subsection (1), the judge is satisfied that the applicant
 (a)  is not a person referred to in paragraph (1)(a), (b) or (c) and appears innocent of any complicity in any indictable offence that resulted in the forfeiture of the property or of any collusion in relation to such an offence, and

 (b)  exercised all reasonable care to be satisfied that the property was not likely to have been used in connection with the commission of an unlawful act by the person who was permitted by the applicant to obtain possession of the property or from whom the applicant obtained possession or, where the applicant is a mortgagee or lienholder, by the mortgagor or lien-giver,

 the judge may make an order declaring that the interest of the applicant is not affected by the forfeiture and declaring the nature and the extent or value of the interest.

 Marginal note: Appeal from order made under subsection (4)
 (5)  An applicant or the Attorney General may appeal to the court of appeal from an order made under subsection (4), and the provisions of Part XXI with respect to procedure on appeals apply, with any modifications that the circumstances require, in respect of appeals under this subsection.

 Marginal note: Return of property
 (6)  The Attorney General shall, on application made to the Attorney General by any person in respect of whom a judge has made an order under subsection (4), and where the periods with respect to the taking of appeals from that order have expired and any appeal from that order taken under subsection (5) has been determined, direct that
 (a)  the property, or the part of it to which the interest of the applicant relates, be returned to the applicant; or

 (b)  an amount equal to the value of the interest of the applicant, as declared in the order, be paid to the applicant.

 1997, c. 23, s. 15
 2001, c. 32, s. 34

 Marginal note: Appeals from orders under subsection 490.2(2)
 490.6  Any person who, in their opinion, is aggrieved by an order made under subsection 490.2(2) may appeal from the order as if the order were an appeal against conviction or against a judgment or verdict of acquittal, as the case may be, under Part XXI, and that Part applies, with any modifications that the circumstances require, in respect of such an appeal.
 1997, c. 23, s. 15

 Marginal note: Suspension of order pending appeal
 490.7  Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the operation of an order made in respect of property under subsection 490.1(1), 490.2(2) or 490.5(4) is suspended pending
 (a)  any application made in respect of the property under any of those provisions or any other provision of this or any other Act of Parliament that provides for restoration or forfeiture of the property, or

 (b)  any appeal taken from an order of forfeiture or restoration in respect of the property,

 and the property shall not be disposed of or otherwise dealt with until thirty days have expired after an order is made under any of those provisions.
 1997, c. 23, s. 15

 Marginal note: Application for restraint order
 490.8   (1)  The Attorney General may make an application in accordance with this section for a restraint order under this section in respect of any offence-related property.

 Marginal note: Procedure
 (2)  An application made under subsection (1) for a restraint order in respect of any offence-related property may be made ex parte and shall be made in writing to a judge and be accompanied by an affidavit sworn on the information and belief of the Attorney General or any other person deposing to the following matters:
 (a)  the indictable offence to which the offence-related property relates;

 (b)  the person who is believed to be in possession of the offence-related property; and

 (c)  a description of the offence-related property.

 Marginal note: Restraint order
 (3)  Where an application for a restraint order is made to a judge under subsection (1), the judge may, if satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the property is offence-related property, make a restraint order prohibiting any person from disposing of, or otherwise dealing with any interest in, the offence-related property specified in the order otherwise than in the manner that may be specified in the order.

 Marginal note: Property outside Canada
 (3.1)  A restraint order may be issued under this section in respect of property situated outside Canada, with any modifications that the circumstances require.

 Marginal note: Conditions
 (4)  A restraint order made by a judge under this section may be subject to any reasonable conditions that the judge thinks fit.

 Marginal note: Order in writing
 (5)  A restraint order made under this section shall be made in writing.

 Marginal note: Service of order
 (6)  A copy of a restraint order made under this section shall be served on the person to whom the order is addressed in any manner that the judge making the order directs or in accordance with the rules of the court.

 Marginal note: Registration of order
 (7)  A copy of a restraint order made under this section shall be registered against any property in accordance with the laws of the province in which the property is situated.

 Marginal note: Order continues in force
 (8)  A restraint order made under this section remains in effect until
 (a)  an order is made under subsection 490(9) or (11), 490.4(3) or 490.41(3) in relation to the property; or

 (b)  an order of forfeiture of the property is made under section 490 or subsection 490.1(1) or 490.2(2).

 Marginal note: Offence
 (9)  Any person on whom a restraint order made under this section is served in accordance with this section and who, while the order is in force, acts in contravention of or fails to comply with the order is guilty of an indictable offence or an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 1997, c. 23, s. 15
 2001, c. 32, s. 35

 Marginal note: Management order
 490.81   (1)  With respect to offence-related property other than a controlled substance within the meaning of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act , on application of the Attorney General or of any other person with the written consent of the Attorney General, a judge or justice in the case of offence-related property seized under section 487, or a judge in the case of offence-related property restrained under section 490.8, may, where he or she is of the opinion that the circumstances so require,
 (a)  appoint a person to take control of and to manage or otherwise deal with all or part of the property in accordance with the directions of the judge or justice; and

 (b)  require any person having possession of that property to give possession of the property to the person appointed under paragraph (a).

 Marginal note: Appointment of Minister of Public Works and Government Services
 (2)  When the Attorney General of Canada so requests, a judge or justice appointing a person under subsection (1) shall appoint the Minister of Public Works and Government Services.

 Marginal note: Power to manage
 (3)  The power to manage or otherwise deal with property under subsection (1) includes
 (a)  in the case of perishable or rapidly depreciating property, the power to make an interlocutory sale of that property; and

 (b)  in the case of property that has little or no value, the power to destroy that property.

 Marginal note: Application for destruction order
 (4)  Before a person appointed to manage property destroys property that has little or no value, he or she shall apply to a court for a destruction order.

 Marginal note: Notice
 (5)  Before making a destruction order in relation to any property, a court shall require notice in accordance with subsection (6) to be given to, and may hear, any person who, in the opinion of the court, appears to have a valid interest in the property.

 Marginal note: Manner of giving notice
 (6)  A notice shall
 (a)  be given or served in the manner that the court directs or that may be specified in the rules of the court; and

 (b)  be of any duration that the court considers reasonable or that may be specified in the rules of the court.

 Marginal note: Order
 (7)  A court may order that the property be destroyed if it is satisfied that the property has little or no value, whether financial or other.

 Marginal note: When management order ceases to have effect
 (8)  A management order ceases to have effect when the property that is the subject of the management order is returned in accordance with the law to an applicant or forfeited to Her Majesty.

 Marginal note: Application to vary conditions
 (9)  The Attorney General may at any time apply to the judge or justice to cancel or vary any condition to which a management order is subject, but may not apply to vary an appointment made under subsection (2).

 2001, c. 32, s. 36

 Marginal note: Sections 489.1 and 490 applicable
 490.9   (1)  Subject to sections 490.1 to 490.7, sections 489.1 and 490 apply, with any modifications that the circumstances require, to any offence-related property that is the subject of a restraint order made under section 490.8.

 Marginal note: Recognizance
 (2)  Where, pursuant to subsection (1), an order is made under paragraph 490(9)(c) for the return of any offence-related property that is the subject of a restraint order under section 490.8, the judge or justice making the order may require the applicant for the order to enter into a recognizance before the judge or justice, with or without sureties, in any amount and with any conditions that the judge or justice directs and, where the judge or justice considers it appropriate, require the applicant to deposit with the judge or justice any sum of money or other valuable security that the judge or justice directs.

 1997, c. 23, s. 15

 Marginal note: Forfeiture of weapons and ammunition
 491   (1)  Subject to subsection (2), where it is determined by a court that
 (a)  a weapon, an imitation firearm, a prohibited device, any ammunition, any prohibited ammunition or an explosive substance was used in the commission of an offence and that thing has been seized and detained, or

 (b)  that a person has committed an offence that involves, or the subject-matter of which is, a firearm, a cross-bow, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or an explosive substance and any such thing has been seized and detained,

 the thing so seized and detained is forfeited to Her Majesty and shall be disposed of as the Attorney General directs.

 Marginal note: Return to lawful owner
 (2)  If the court by which a determination referred to in subsection (1) is made is satisfied that the lawful owner of any thing that is or may be forfeited to Her Majesty under subsection (1) was not a party to the offence and had no reasonable grounds to believe that the thing would or might be used in the commission of an offence, the court shall order that the thing be returned to that lawful owner, that the proceeds of any sale of the thing be paid to that lawful owner or, if the thing was destroyed, that an amount equal to the value of the thing be paid to the owner.

 Marginal note: Application of proceeds
 (3)  Where any thing in respect of which this section applies is sold, the proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the Attorney General or, where an order is made under subsection (2), to the person who was, immediately prior to the sale, the lawful owner of the thing.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 491
 1991, c. 40, s. 30
 1995, c. 39, s. 152

 Marginal note: Order for restitution or forfeiture of property obtained by crime
 491.1   (1)  Where an accused or defendant is tried for an offence and the court determines that an offence has been committed, whether or not the accused has been convicted or discharged under section 730 of the offence, and at the time of the trial any property obtained by the commission of the offence
 (a)  is before the court or has been detained so that it can be immediately dealt with, and

 (b)  will not be required as evidence in any other proceedings,

 section 490 does not apply in respect of the property and the court shall make an order under subsection (2) in respect of the property.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (2)  In the circumstances referred to in subsection (1), the court shall order, in respect of any property,
 (a)  if the lawful owner or person lawfully entitled to possession of the property is known, that it be returned to that person; and

 (b)  if the lawful owner or person lawfully entitled to possession of the property is not known, that it be forfeited to Her Majesty, to be disposed of as the Attorney General directs or otherwise dealt with in accordance with the law.

 Marginal note: When certain orders not to be made
 (3)  An order shall not be made under subsection (2)
 (a)  in the case of proceedings against a trustee, banker, merchant, attorney, factor, broker or other agent entrusted with the possession of goods or documents of title to goods, for an offence under section 330, 331, 332 or 336; or

 (b)  in respect of
 (i)  property to which a person acting in good faith and without notice has acquired lawful title for valuable consideration,

 (ii)  a valuable security that has been paid or discharged in good faith by a person who was liable to pay or discharge it,

 (iii)  a negotiable instrument that has, in good faith, been taken or received by transfer or delivery for valuable consideration by a person who had no notice and no reasonable cause to suspect that an offence had been committed, or

 (iv)  property in respect of which there is a dispute as to ownership or right of possession by claimants other than the accused or defendant.

 Marginal note: By whom order executed
 (4)  An order made under this section shall, on the direction of the court, be executed by the peace officers by whom the process of the court is ordinarily executed.

 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 74, c. 1 (4th Supp.), s. 18(F)
 1995, c. 22, s. 18

 Marginal note: Photographic evidence
 491.2   (1)  Before any property that would otherwise be required to be produced for the purposes of a preliminary inquiry, trial or other proceeding in respect of an offence under section 334, 344, 348, 354, 362 or 380 is returned or ordered to be returned, forfeited or otherwise dealt with under section 489.1 or 490 or is otherwise returned, a peace officer or any person under the direction of a peace officer may take and retain a photograph of the property.

 Marginal note: Certified photograph admissible in evidence
 (2)  Every photograph of property taken under subsection (1), accompanied by a certificate of a person containing the statements referred to in subsection (3), shall be admissible in evidence and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, shall have the same probative force as the property would have had if it had been proved in the ordinary way.

 Marginal note: Statements made in certificate
 (3)  For the purposes of subsection (2), a certificate of a person stating that
 (a)  the person took the photograph under the authority of subsection (1),

 (b)  the person is a peace officer or took the photograph under the direction of a peace officer, and

 (c)  the photograph is a true photograph

 shall be admissible in evidence and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, is evidence of the statements contained in the certificate without proof of the signature of the person appearing to have signed the certificate.

 Marginal note: Secondary evidence of peace officer
 (4)  An affidavit or solemn declaration of a peace officer or other person stating that the person has seized property and detained it or caused it to be detained from the time that person took possession of the property until a photograph of the property was taken under subsection (1) and that the property was not altered in any manner before the photograph was taken shall be admissible in evidence and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, is evidence of the statements contained in the affidavit or solemn declaration without proof of the signature or official character of the person appearing to have signed the affidavit or solemn declaration.

 Marginal note: Notice of intention to produce certified photograph
 (5)  Unless the court orders otherwise, no photograph, certificate, affidavit or solemn declaration shall be received in evidence at a trial or other proceeding pursuant to subsection (2), (3) or (4) unless the prosecutor has, before the trial or other proceeding, given to the accused a copy thereof and reasonable notice of intention to produce it in evidence.

 Marginal note: Attendance for examination
 (6)  Notwithstanding subsection (3) or (4), the court may require the person who appears to have signed a certificate, an affidavit or a solemn declaration referred to in that subsection to appear before it for examination or cross-examination in respect of the issue of proof of any of the facts contained in the certificate, affidavit or solemn declaration.

 Marginal note: Production of property in court
 (7)  A court may order any property seized and returned pursuant to section 489.1 or 490 to be produced in court or made available for examination by all parties to a proceeding at a reasonable time and place, notwithstanding that a photograph of the property has been received in evidence pursuant to subsection (2), where the court is satisfied that the interests of justice so require and that it is possible and practicable to do so in the circumstances.

 Marginal note: Definition of “photograph”
 (8)  In this section, photograph includes a still photograph, a photographic film or plate, a microphotographic film, a photostatic negative, an X-ray film, a motion picture and a videotape.

 R.S., 1985, c. 23 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1992, c. 1, s. 58

 Marginal note: Seizure of explosives
 492   (1)  Every person who executes a warrant issued under section 487 or 487.1 may seize any explosive substance that he suspects is intended to be used for an unlawful purpose, and shall, as soon as possible, remove to a place of safety anything that he seizes by virtue of this section and detain it until he is ordered by a judge of a superior court to deliver it to some other person or an order is made pursuant to subsection (2).

 Marginal note: Forfeiture
 (2)  Where an accused is convicted of an offence in respect of anything seized by virtue of subsection (1), it is forfeited and shall be dealt with as the court that makes the conviction may direct.

 Marginal note: Application of proceeds
 (3)  Where anything to which this section applies is sold, the proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the Attorney General.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 492
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 70

 Marginal note: Information for tracking warrant
 492.1   (1)  A justice who is satisfied by information on oath in writing that there are reasonable grounds to suspect that an offence under this or any other Act of Parliament has been or will be committed and that information that is relevant to the commission of the offence, including the whereabouts of any person, can be obtained through the use of a tracking device, may at any time issue a warrant authorizing a peace officer or a public officer who has been appointed or designated to administer or enforce a federal or provincial law and whose duties include the enforcement of this Act or any other Act of Parliament and who is named in the warrant
 (a)  to install, maintain and remove a tracking device in or on any thing, including a thing carried, used or worn by any person; and

 (b)  to monitor, or to have monitored, a tracking device installed in or on any thing.

 Marginal note: Time limit for warrant
 (2)  A warrant issued under subsection (1) is valid for the period, not exceeding sixty days, mentioned in it.

 Marginal note: Further warrants
 (3)  A justice may issue further warrants under this section.

 Definition of tracking device
 (4)  For the purposes of this section, tracking device means any device that, when installed in or on any thing, may be used to help ascertain, by electronic or other means, the location of any thing or person.

 Marginal note: Removal after expiry of warrant
 (5)  On ex parte application in writing supported by affidavit, the justice who issued a warrant under subsection (1) or a further warrant under subsection (3) or any other justice having jurisdiction to issue such warrants may authorize that the tracking device be covertly removed after the expiry of the warrant
 (a)  under any terms or conditions that the justice considers advisable in the public interest; and

 (b)  during any specified period of not more than sixty days.

 1993, c. 40, s. 18
 1999, c. 5, s. 18

 Marginal note: Information re number recorder
 492.2   (1)  A justice who is satisfied by information on oath in writing that there are reasonable grounds to suspect that an offence under this or any other Act of Parliament has been or will be committed and that information that would assist in the investigation of the offence could be obtained through the use of a number recorder, may at any time issue a warrant authorizing a peace officer or a public officer who has been appointed or designated to administer or enforce a federal or provincial law and whose duties include the enforcement of this Act or any other Act of Parliament and who is named in the warrant
 (a)  to install, maintain and remove a number recorder in relation to any telephone or telephone line; and

 (b)  to monitor, or to have monitored, the number recorder.

 Marginal note: Order re telephone records
 (2)  When the circumstances referred to in subsection (1) exist, a justice may order that any person or body that lawfully possesses records of telephone calls originated from, or received or intended to be received at, any telephone give the records, or a copy of the records, to a person named in the order.

 Marginal note: Other provisions to apply
 (3)  Subsections 492.1(2) and (3) apply to warrants and orders issued under this section, with such modifications as the circumstances require.

 Marginal note: Definition of “number recorder”
 (4)  For the purposes of this section, number recorder means any device that can be used to record or identify the telephone number or location of the telephone from which a telephone call originates, or at which it is received or is intended to be received.

 1993, c. 40, s. 18
 1999, c. 5, s. 19

 PART XVI Compelling Appearance of Accused Before a Justice and Interim Release
 Interpretation
 Marginal note: Definitions
 493  In this Part,
 accused
 prévenu
 accused includes
 (a)  a person to whom a peace officer has issued an appearance notice under section 496, and

 (b)  a person arrested for a criminal offence; ( prévenu )

 appearance notice
 citation à comparaître
 appearance notice means a notice in Form 9 issued by a peace officer; ( citation à comparaître )
 judge
 juge
 judge means
 (a)  in the Province of Ontario, a judge of the superior court of criminal jurisdiction of the Province,

 (b)  in the Province of Quebec, a judge of the superior court of criminal jurisdiction of the province or three judges of the Court of Quebec,

 (c)   [Repealed, 1992, c. 51, s. 37]

 (d)  in the Provinces of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Manitoba, British Columbia, Prince Edward Island, Saskatchewan, Alberta and Newfoundland, a judge of the superior court of criminal jurisdiction of the Province,

 (e)  in Yukon and the Northwest Territories, a judge of the Supreme Court, and

 (f)  in Nunavut, a judge of the Nunavut Court of Justice; ( juge )

 officer in charge
 fonctionnaire responsable
 officer in charge means the officer for the time being in command of the police force responsible for the lock-up or other place to which an accused is taken after arrest or a peace officer designated by him for the purposes of this Part who is in charge of that place at the time an accused is taken to that place to be detained in custody; ( fonctionnaire responsable )
 promise to appear
 promesse de comparaître
 promise to appear means a promise in Form 10; ( promesse de comparaître )
 recognizance
 engagement
 recognizance , when used in relation to a recognizance entered into before an officer in charge, or other peace officer, means a recognizance in Form 11, and when used in relation to a recognizance entered into before a justice or judge, means a recognizance in Form 32; ( engagement )
 summons
 sommation
 summons means a summons in Form 6 issued by a justice or judge; ( sommation )
 undertaking
 promesse
 undertaking means an undertaking in Form 11.1 or 12; ( promesse )
 warrant
 mandat
 warrant , when used in relation to a warrant for the arrest of a person, means a warrant in Form 7 and, when used in relation to a warrant for the committal of a person, means a warrant in Form 8. ( mandat )
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 493
 R.S., 1985, c. 11 (1st Supp.), s. 2, c. 27 (2nd Supp.), s. 10, c. 40 (4th Supp.), s. 2
 1990, c. 16, s. 5, c. 17, s. 12
 1992, c. 51, s. 37
 1994, c. 44, s. 39
 1999, c. 3, s. 30
 2002, c. 7, s. 143

 Arrest without Warrant and Release from Custody
 Marginal note: Arrest without warrant by any person
 494   (1)  Any one may arrest without warrant
 (a)  a person whom he finds committing an indictable offence; or

 (b)  a person who, on reasonable grounds, he believes
 (i)  has committed a criminal offence, and

 (ii)  is escaping from and freshly pursued by persons who have lawful authority to arrest that person.

 Marginal note: Arrest by owner, etc., of property
 (2)  Any one who is
 (a)  the owner or a person in lawful possession of property, or

 (b)  a person authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of property,

 may arrest without warrant a person whom he finds committing a criminal offence on or in relation to that property.

 Marginal note: Delivery to peace officer
 (3)  Any one other than a peace officer who arrests a person without warrant shall forthwith deliver the person to a peace officer.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 449
 R.S., c. 2(2nd Supp.), s. 5

 Marginal note: Arrest without warrant by peace officer
 495   (1)  A peace officer may arrest without warrant
 (a)  a person who has committed an indictable offence or who, on reasonable grounds, he believes has committed or is about to commit an indictable offence;

 (b)  a person whom he finds committing a criminal offence; or

 (c)  a person in respect of whom he has reasonable grounds to believe that a warrant of arrest or committal, in any form set out in Part XXVIII in relation thereto, is in force within the territorial jurisdiction in which the person is found.

 Marginal note: Limitation
 (2)  A peace officer shall not arrest a person without warrant for
 (a)  an indictable offence mentioned in section 553,

 (b)  an offence for which the person may be prosecuted by indictment or for which he is punishable on summary conviction, or

 (c)  an offence punishable on summary conviction,

 in any case where
 (d)  he believes on reasonable grounds that the public interest, having regard to all the circumstances including the need to
 (i)  establish the identity of the person,

 (ii)  secure or preserve evidence of or relating to the offence, or

 (iii)  prevent the continuation or repetition of the offence or the commission of another offence,

 may be satisfied without so arresting the person, and

 (e)  he has no reasonable grounds to believe that, if he does not so arrest the person, the person will fail to attend court in order to be dealt with according to law.

 Marginal note: Consequences of arrest without warrant
 (3)  Notwithstanding subsection (2), a peace officer acting under subsection (1) is deemed to be acting lawfully and in the execution of his duty for the purposes of
 (a)  any proceedings under this or any other Act of Parliament; and

 (b)  any other proceedings, unless in any such proceedings it is alleged and established by the person making the allegation that the peace officer did not comply with the requirements of subsection (2).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 495
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 75

 Marginal note: Issue of appearance notice by peace officer
 496  Where, by virtue of subsection 495(2), a peace officer does not arrest a person, he may issue an appearance notice to the person if the offence is
 (a)  an indictable offence mentioned in section 553;

 (b)  an offence for which the person may be prosecuted by indictment or for which he is punishable on summary conviction; or

 (c)  an offence punishable on summary conviction.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 451
 R.S., c. 2(2nd Supp.), s. 5

 Marginal note: Release from custody by peace officer
 497   (1)  Subject to subsection (1.1), if a peace officer arrests a person without warrant for an offence described in paragraph 496(a), (b) or (c), the peace officer shall, as soon as practicable,
 (a)  release the person from custody with the intention of compelling their appearance by way of summons; or

 (b)  issue an appearance notice to the person and then release them.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (1.1)  A peace officer shall not release a person under subsection (1) if the peace officer believes, on reasonable grounds,
 (a)  that it is necessary in the public interest that the person be detained in custody or that the matter of their release from custody be dealt with under another provision of this Part, having regard to all the circumstances including the need to
 (i)  establish the identity of the person,

 (ii)  secure or preserve evidence of or relating to the offence,

 (iii)  prevent the continuation or repetition of the offence or the commission of another offence, or

 (iv)  ensure the safety and security of any victim of or witness to the offence; or

 (b)  that if the person is released from custody, the person will fail to attend court in order to be dealt with according to law.

 Marginal note: Where subsection (1) does not apply
 (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply in respect of a person who has been arrested without warrant by a peace officer for an offence described in subsection 503(3).

 Marginal note: Consequences of non-release
 (3)  A peace officer who has arrested a person without warrant for an offence described in subsection (1) and who does not release the person from custody as soon as practicable in the manner described in that subsection shall be deemed to be acting lawfully and in the execution of the peace officer’s duty for the purposes of
 (a)  any proceedings under this or any other Act of Parliament; and

 (b)  any other proceedings, unless in any such proceedings it is alleged and established by the person making the allegation that the peace officer did not comply with the requirements of subsection (1).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 497
 1999, c. 25, s. 3(Preamble)

 Marginal note: Release from custody by officer in charge
 498   (1)  Subject to subsection (1.1), if a person who has been arrested without warrant by a peace officer is taken into custody, or if a person who has been arrested without warrant and delivered to a peace officer under subsection 494(3) or placed in the custody of a peace officer under subsection 163.5(3) of the Customs Act is detained in custody under subsection 503(1) for an offence described in paragraph 496(a), (b) or (c), or any other offence that is punishable by imprisonment for five years or less, and has not been taken before a justice or released from custody under any other provision of this Part, the officer in charge or another peace officer shall, as soon as practicable,
 (a)  release the person with the intention of compelling their appearance by way of summons;

 (b)  release the person on their giving a promise to appear;

 (c)  release the person on the person’s entering into a recognizance before the officer in charge or another peace officer without sureties in an amount not exceeding $500 that the officer directs, but without deposit of money or other valuable security; or

 (d)  if the person is not ordinarily resident in the province in which the person is in custody or does not ordinarily reside within 200 kilometres of the place in which the person is in custody, release the person on the person’s entering into a recognizance before the officer in charge or another peace officer without sureties in an amount not exceeding $500 that the officer directs and, if the officer so directs, on depositing with the officer a sum of money or other valuable security not exceeding in amount or value $500, that the officer directs.

 Marginal note: Exception
 (1.1)  The officer in charge or the peace officer shall not release a person under subsection (1) if the officer in charge or peace officer believes, on reasonable grounds,
 (a)  that it is necessary in the public interest that the person be detained in custody or that the matter of their release from custody be dealt with under another provision of this Part, having regard to all the circumstances including the need to
 (i)  establish the identity of the person,

 (ii)  secure or preserve evidence of or relating to the offence,

 (iii)  prevent the continuation or repetition of the offence or the commission of another offence, or

 (iv)  ensure the safety and security of any victim of or witness to the offence; or

 (b)  that, if the person is released from custody, the person will fail to attend court in order to be dealt with according to law.

 Marginal note: Where subsection (1) does not apply
 (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply in respect of a person who has been arrested without warrant by a peace officer for an offence described in subsection 503(3).

 Marginal note: Consequences of non-release
 (3)  An officer in charge or another peace officer who has the custody of a person taken into or detained in custody for an offence described in subsection (1) and who does not release the person from custody as soon as practicable in the manner described in that subsection shall be deemed to be acting lawfully and in the execution of the officer’s duty for the purposes of
 (a)  any proceedings under this or any other Act of Parliament; or

 (b)  any other proceedings, unless in any such proceedings it is alleged and established by the person making the allegation that the officer in charge or other peace officer did not comply with the requirements of subsection (1).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 498
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 186
 1997, c. 18, s. 52
 1998, c. 7, s. 2
 1999, c. 25, ss. 4, 30(Preamble)

 Marginal note: Release from custody by officer in charge where arrest made with warrant
 499   (1)  Where a person who has been arrested with a warrant by a peace officer is taken into custody for an offence other than one mentioned in section 522, the officer in charge may, if the warrant has been endorsed by a justice under subsection 507(6),
 (a)  release the person on the person’s giving a promise to appear;

 (b)  release the person on the person’s entering into a recognizance before the officer in charge without sureties in the amount not exceeding five hundred dollars that the officer in charge directs, but without deposit of money or other valuable security; or

 (c)  if the person is not ordinarily resident in the province in which the person is in custody or does not ordinarily reside within two hundred kilometres of the place in which the person is in custody, release the person on the person’s entering into a recognizance before the officer in charge without sureties in the amount not exceeding five hundred dollars that the officer in charge directs and, if the officer in charge so directs, on depositing with the officer in charge such sum of money or other valuable security not exceeding in amount or value five hundred dollars, as the officer in charge directs.

 Marginal note: Additional conditions
 (2)  In addition to the conditions for release set out in paragraphs (1)(a), (b) and (c), the officer in charge may also require the person to enter into an undertaking in Form 11.1 in which the person, in order to be released, undertakes to do one or more of the following things:
 (a)  to remain within a territorial jurisdiction specified in the undertaking;

 (b)  to notify a peace officer or another person mentioned in the undertaking of any change in his or her address, employment or occupation;

 (c)  to abstain from communicating, directly or indirectly, with any victim, witness or other person identified in the undertaking, or from going to a place specified in the undertaking, except in accordance with the conditions specified in the undertaking;

 (d)  to deposit the person’s passport with the peace officer or other person mentioned in the undertaking;

 (e)  to abstain from possessing a firearm and to surrender any firearm in the possession of the person and any authorization, licence or registration certificate or other document enabling that person to acquire or possess a firearm;

 (f)  to report at the times specified in the undertaking to a peace officer or other person designated in the undertaking;

 (g)  to abstain from
 (i)  the consumption of alcohol or other intoxicating substances, or

 (ii)  the consumption of drugs except in accordance with a medical prescription; and

 (h)  to comply with any other condition specified in the undertaking that the officer in charge considers necessary to ensure the safety and security of any victim of or witness to the offence.

 Marginal note: Application to justice
 (3)  A person who has entered into an undertaking under subsection (2) may, at any time before or at his or her appearance pursuant to a promise to appear or recognizance, apply to a justice for an order under subsection 515(1) to replace his or her undertaking, and section 515 applies, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to such a person.

 Marginal note: Application by prosecutor
 (4)  Where a person has entered into an undertaking under subsection (2), the prosecutor may
 (a)  at any time before the appearance of the person pursuant to a promise to appear or recognizance, after three days notice has been given to that person, or

 (b)  at the appearance,

 apply to a justice for an order under subsection 515(2) to replace the undertaking, and section 515 applies, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to such a person.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 499
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 186
 1994, c. 44, s. 40
 1997, c. 18, s. 53
 1999, c. 25, s. 5(Preamble)

 Marginal note: Money or other valuable security to be deposited with justice
 500  If a person has, under paragraph 498(1)(d) or 499(1)(c), deposited any sum of money or other valuable security with the officer in charge, the officer in charge shall, without delay after the deposit, cause the money or valuable security to be delivered to a justice for deposit with the justice.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 500
 1999, c. 5, s. 20, c. 25, s. 6(Preamble)

 Marginal note: Contents of appearance notice, promise to appear and recognizance
 501   (1)  An appearance notice issued by a peace officer or a promise to appear given to, or a recognizance entered into before, an officer in charge or another peace officer shall
 (a)  set out the name of the accused;

 (b)  set out the substance of the offence that the accused is alleged to have committed; and

 (c)  require the accused to attend court at a time and place to be stated therein and to attend thereafter as required by the court in order to be dealt with according to law.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (2)  An appearance notice issued by a peace officer or a promise to appear given to, or a recognizance entered into before, an officer in charge or another peace officer shall set out the text of subsections 145(5) and (6) and section 502.

 Marginal note: Attendance for purposes of Identification of Criminals Act
 (3)  An appearance notice issued by a peace officer or a promise to appear given to, or a recognizance entered into before, an officer in charge or another peace officer may require the accused to appear at a time and place stated in it for the purposes of the Identification of Criminals Act , where the accused is alleged to have committed an indictable offence and, in the case of an offence designated as a contravention under the Contraventions Act , the Attorney General, within the meaning of that Act, has not made an election under section 50 of that Act.

 Marginal note: Signature of accused
 (4)  An accused shall be requested to sign in duplicate his appearance notice, promise to appear or recognizance and, whether or not he complies with that request, one of the duplicates shall be given to the accused, but if the accused fails or refuses to sign, the lack of his signature does not invalidate the appearance notice, promise to appear or recognizance, as the case may be.

 Marginal note: Proof of issue of appearance notice
 (5)  The issue of an appearance notice by any peace officer may be proved by the oral evidence, given under oath, of the officer who issued it or by the officer’s affidavit made before a justice or other person authorized to administer oaths or to take affidavits.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 501
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 76
 1992, c. 47, s. 69
 1994, c. 44, ss. 41, 94
 1996, c. 7, s. 38

 Marginal note: Failure to appear
 502  Where an accused who is required by an appearance notice or promise to appear or by a recognizance entered into before an officer in charge or another peace officer to appear at a time and place stated therein for the purposes of the Identification of Criminals Act does not appear at that time and place, a justice may, where the appearance notice, promise to appear or recognizance has been confirmed by a justice under section 508, issue a warrant for the arrest of the accused for the offence with which the accused is charged.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 502
 1992, c. 47, s. 70
 1996, c. 7, s. 38
 1997, c. 18, s. 54

 Appearance of Accused before Justice
 Marginal note: Taking before justice
 503   (1)  A peace officer who arrests a person with or without warrant or to whom a person is delivered under subsection 494(3) or into whose custody a person is placed under subsection 163.5(3) of the Customs Act shall cause the person to be detained in custody and, in accordance with the following provisions, to be taken before a justice to be dealt with according to law:
 (a)  where a justice is available within a period of twenty-four hours after the person has been arrested by or delivered to the peace officer, the person shall be taken before a justice without unreasonable delay and in any event within that period, and

 (b)  where a justice is not available within a period of twenty-four hours after the person has been arrested by or delivered to the peace officer, the person shall be taken before a justice as soon as possible,

 unless, at any time before the expiration of the time prescribed in paragraph (a) or (b) for taking the person before a justice,
 (c)  the peace officer or officer in charge releases the person under any other provision of this Part, or

 (d)  the peace officer or officer in charge is satisfied that the person should be released from custody, whether unconditionally under subsection (4) or otherwise conditionally or unconditionally, and so releases him.

 Marginal note: Conditional release
 (2)  If a peace officer or an officer in charge is satisfied that a person described in subsection (1) should be released from custody conditionally, the officer may, unless the person is detained in custody for an offence mentioned in section 522, release that person on the person’s giving a promise to appear or entering into a recognizance in accordance with paragraphs 498(1)(b) to (d) and subsection (2.1).

 Marginal note: Undertaking
 (2.1)  In addition to the conditions referred to in subsection (2), the peace officer or officer in charge may, in order to release the person, require the person to enter into an undertaking in Form 11.1 in which the person undertakes to do one or more of the following things:
 (a)  to remain within a territorial jurisdiction specified in the undertaking;

 (b)  to notify the peace officer or another person mentioned in the undertaking of any change in his or her address, employment or occupation;

 (c)  to abstain from communicating, directly or indirectly, with any victim, witness or other person identified in the undertaking, or from going to a place specified in the undertaking, except in accordance with the conditions specified in the undertaking;

 (d)  to deposit the person’s passport with the peace officer or other person mentioned in the undertaking;

 (e)  to abstain from possessing a firearm and to surrender any firearm in the possession of the person and any authorization, licence or registration certificate or other document enabling that person to acquire or possess a firearm;

 (f)  to report at the times specified in the undertaking to a peace officer or other person designated in the undertaking;

 (g)  to abstain from
 (i)  the consumption of alcohol or other intoxicating substances, or

 (ii)  the consumption of drugs except in accordance with a medical prescription; or

 (h)  to comply with any other condition specified in the undertaking that the peace officer or officer in charge considers necessary to ensure the safety and security of any victim of or witness to the offence.

 Marginal note: Application to justice
 (2.2)  A person who has entered into an undertaking under subsection (2.1) may, at any time before or at his or her appearance pursuant to a promise to appear or recognizance, apply to a justice for an order under subsection 515(1) to replace his or her undertaking, and section 515 applies, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to such a person.

 Marginal note: Application by prosecutor
 (2.3)  Where a person has entered into an undertaking under subsection (2.1), the prosecutor may
 (a)  at any time before the appearance of the person pursuant to a promise to appear or recognizance, after three days notice has been given to that person, or

 (b)  at the appearance,

 apply to a justice for an order under subsection 515(2) to replace the undertaking, and section 515 applies, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to such a person.

 Marginal note: Remand in custody for return to jurisdiction where offence alleged to have been committed
 (3)  Where a person has been arrested without warrant for an indictable offence alleged to have been committed in Canada outside the territorial division where the arrest took place, the person shall, within the time prescribed in paragraph (1)(a) or (b), be taken before a justice within whose jurisdiction the person was arrested unless, where the offence was alleged to have been committed within the province in which the person was arrested, the person was taken before a justice within whose jurisdiction the offence was alleged to have been committed, and the justice within whose jurisdiction the person was arrested
 (a)  if the justice is not satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person arrested is the person alleged to have committed the offence, shall release that person; or

 (b)  if the justice is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person arrested is the person alleged to have committed the offence, may
 (i)  remand the person to the custody of a peace officer to await execution of a warrant for his or her arrest in accordance with section 528, but if no warrant is so executed within a period of six days after the time he or she is remanded to such custody, the person in whose custody he or she then is shall release him or her, or

 (ii)  where the offence was alleged to have been committed within the province in which the person was arrested, order the person to be taken before a justice having jurisdiction with respect to the offence.

 Marginal note: Interim release
 (3.1)  Notwithstanding paragraph (3)(b), a justice may, with the consent of the prosecutor, order that the person referred to in subsection (3), pending the execution of a warrant for the arrest of that person, be released
 (a)  unconditionally; or

 (b)  on any of the following terms to which the prosecutor consents, namely,
 (i)  giving an undertaking, including an undertaking to appear at a specified time before the court that has jurisdiction with respect to the indictable offence that the person is alleged to have committed, or

 (ii)  entering into a recognizance described in any of paragraphs 515(2)(a) to (e)

 with such conditions described in subsection 515(4) as the justice considers desirable and to which the prosecutor consents.

 Marginal note: Release of person about to commit indictable offence
 (4)  A peace officer or an officer in charge having the custody of a person who has been arrested without warrant as a person about to commit an indictable offence shall release that person unconditionally as soon as practicable after he is satisfied that the continued detention of that person in custody is no longer necessary in order to prevent the commission by him of an indictable offence.

 Marginal note: Consequences of non-release
 (5)  Notwithstanding subsection (4), a peace officer or an officer in charge having the custody of a person referred to in that subsection who does not release the person before the expiration of the time prescribed in paragraph (1)(a) or (b) for taking the person before the justice shall be deemed to be acting lawfully and in the execution of his duty for the purposes of
 (a)  any proceedings under this or any other Act of Parliament; or

 (b)  any other proceedings, unless in such proceedings it is alleged and established by the person making the allegation that the peace officer or officer in charge did not comply with the requirements of subsection (4).

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 503
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 77
 1994, c. 44, s. 42
 1997, c. 18, s. 55
 1998, c. 7, s. 3
 1999, c. 25, s. 7(Preamble)

 Information, Summons and Warrant
 Marginal note: In what cases justice may receive information
 504  Any one who, on reasonable grounds, believes that a person has committed an indictable offence may lay an information in writing and under oath before a justice, and the justice shall receive the information, where it is alleged
 (a)  that the person has committed, anywhere, an indictable offence that may be tried in the province in which the justice resides, and that the person
 (i)  is or is believed to be, or

 (ii)  resides or is believed to reside,

 within the territorial jurisdiction of the justice;

 (b)  that the person, wherever he may be, has committed an indictable offence within the territorial jurisdiction of the justice;

 (c)  that the person has, anywhere, unlawfully received property that was unlawfully obtained within the territorial jurisdiction of the justice; or

 (d)  that the person has in his possession stolen property within the territorial jurisdiction of the justice.

 R.S., c. C-34, s. 455
 R.S., c. 2(2nd Supp.), s. 5

 Marginal note: Time within which information to be laid in certain cases
 505  Where
 (a)  an appearance notice has been issued to an accused under section 496, or

 (b)  an accused has been released from custody under section 497 or 498,

 an information relating to the offence alleged to have been committed by the accused or relating to an included or other offence alleged to have been committed by him shall be laid before a justice as soon as practicable thereafter and in any event before the time stated in the appearance notice, promise to appear or recognizance issued to or given or entered into by the accused for his attendance in court.
 R.S., c. 2(2nd Supp.), s. 5

 Marginal note: Form
 506  An information laid under section 504 or 505 may be in Form 2.
 R.S., c. 2(2nd Supp.), s. 5

 Marginal note: Justice to hear informant and witnesses — public prosecutions
 507   (1)  Subject to subsection 523(1.1), a justice who receives an information laid under section 504 by a peace officer, a public officer, the Attorney General or the Attorney General’s agent, other than an information laid before the justice under section 505, shall, except if an accused has already been arrested with or without a warrant,
 (a)  hear and consider, ex parte ,
 (i)  the allegations of the informant, and

 (ii)  the evidence of witnesses, where he considers it desirable or necessary to do so; and

 (b)  where he considers that a case for so doing is made out, issue, in accordance with this section, either a summons or a warrant for the arrest of the accused to compel the accused to attend before him or some other justice for the same territorial division to answer to a charge of an offence.

 Marginal note: Process compulsory
 (2)  No justice shall refuse to issue a summons or warrant by reason only that the alleged offence is one for which a person may be arrested without warrant.

 Marginal note: Procedure when witnesses attend
 (3)  A justice who hears the evidence of a witness pursuant to subsection (1) shall
 (a)  take the evidence on oath; and

 (b)  cause the evidence to be taken in accordance with section 540 in so far as that section is capable of being applied.

 Marginal note: Summons to be issued except in certain cases
 (4)  Where a justice considers that a case is made out for compelling an accused to attend before him to answer to a charge of an offence, he shall issue a summons to the accused unless the allegations of the informant or the evidence of any witness or witnesses taken in accordance with subsection (3) discloses reasonable grounds to believe that it is necessary in the public interest to issue a warrant for the arrest of the accused.

 Marginal note: No process in blank
 (5)  A justice shall not sign a summons or warrant in blank.

 Marginal note: Endorsement of warrant by justice
 (6)  A justice who issues a warrant under this section or section 508 or 512 may, unless the offence is one mentioned in section 522, authorize the release of the accused pursuant to section 499 by making an endorsement on the warrant in Form 29.

 Marginal note: Promise to appear or recognizance deemed to have been confirmed
 (7)  Where, pursuant to subsection (6), a justice authorizes the release of an accused pursuant to section 499, a promise to appear given by the accused or a recognizance entered into by the accused pursuant to that section shall be deemed, for the purposes of subsection 145(5), to have been confirmed by a justice under section 508.

 Marginal note: Issue of summons or warrant
 (8)  Where, on an appeal from or review of any decision or matter of jurisdiction, a new trial or hearing or a continuance or renewal of a trial or hearing is ordered, a justice may issue either a summons or a warrant for the arrest of the accused in order to compel the accused to attend at the new or continued or renewed trial or hearing.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 507
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 78
 1994, c. 44, s. 43
 2002, c. 13, s. 21

 Marginal note: Referral when private prosecution
 507.1   (1)  A justice who receives an information laid under section 504, other than an information referred to in subsection 507(1), shall refer it to a provincial court judge or, in Quebec, a judge of the Court of Quebec, or to a designated justice, to consider whether to compel the appearance of the accused on the information.

 Marginal note: Summons or warrant
 (2)  A judge or designated justice to whom an information is referred under subsection (1) and who considers that a case for doing so is made out shall issue either a summons or warrant for the arrest of the accused to compel him or her to attend before a justice to answer to a charge of the offence charged in the information.

 Marginal note: Conditions for issuance
 (3)  The judge or designated justice may issue a summons or warrant only if he or she
 (a)  has heard and considered the allegations of the informant and the evidence of witnesses;

 (b)  is satisfied that the Attorney General has received a copy of the information;

 (c)  is satisfied that the Attorney General has received reasonable notice of the hearing under paragraph (a); and

 (d)  has given the Attorney General an opportunity to attend the hearing under paragraph (a) and to cross-examine and call witnesses and to present any relevant evidence at the hearing.

 Marginal note: Appearance of Attorney General
 (4)  The Attorney General may appear at the hearing held under paragraph (3)(a) without being deemed to intervene in the proceeding.

 Marginal note: Information deemed not to have been laid
 (5)  If the judge or designated justice does not issue a summons or warrant under subsection (2), he or she shall endorse the information with a statement to that effect. Unless the informant, not later than six months after the endorsement, commences proceedings to compel the judge or designated justice to issue a summons or warrant, the information is deemed never to have been laid.

 Marginal note: Information deemed not to have been laid — proceedings commenced
 (6)  If proceedings are commenced under subsection (5) and a summons or warrant is not issued as a result of those proceedings, the information is deemed never to have been laid.

 Marginal note: New evidence required for new hearing
 (7)  If a hearing in respect of an offence has been held under paragraph (3)(a) and the judge or designated justice has not issued a summons or a warrant, no other hearings may be held under that paragraph with respect to the offence or an included offence unless there is new evidence in support of the allegation in respect of which the hearing is sought to be held.

 Marginal note: Subsections 507(2) to (8) to apply
 (8)  Subsections 507(2) to (8) apply to proceedings under this section.

 Marginal note: Non-application — informations laid under sections 810 and 810.1
 (9)  Subsections (1) to (8) do not apply in respect of an information laid under section 810 or 810.1.

 Marginal note: Definition of designated justice
 (10)  In this section, designated justice means a justice designated for the purpose by the chief judge of the provincial court having jurisdiction in the matter or, in Quebec, a justice designated by the chief judge of the Court of Quebec.

 2002, c. 13, s. 22

 Marginal note: Justice to hear informant and witnesses
 508   (1)  A justice who receives an information laid before him under section 505 shall
 (a)  hear and consider, ex parte ,
 (i)  the allegations of the informant, and

 (ii)  the evidence of witnesses, where he considers it desirable or necessary to do so;

 (b)  where he considers that a case for so doing is made out, whether the information relates to the offence alleged in the appearance notice, promise to appear or recognizance or to an included or other offence,
 (i)  confirm the appearance notice, promise to appear or recognizance, as the case may be, and endorse the information accordingly, or

 (ii)  cancel the appearance notice, promise to appear or recognizance, as the case may be, and issue, in accordance with section 507, either a summons or a warrant for the arrest of the accused to compel the accused to attend before him or some other justice for the same territorial division to answer to a charge of an offence and endorse on the summons or warrant that the appearance notice, promise to appear or recognizance, as the case may be, has been cancelled; and

 (c)  where he considers that a case is not made out for the purposes of paragraph (b), cancel the appearance notice, promise to appear or recognizance, as the case may be, and cause the accused to be notified forthwith of the cancellation.

 Marginal note: Procedure when witnesses attend
 (2)  A justice who hears the evidence of a witness pursuant to subsection (1) shall
 (a)  take the evidence on oath; and

 (b)  cause the evidence to be taken in accordance with section 540 in so far as that section is capable of being applied.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 508
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 79

 Marginal note: Information laid otherwise than in person
 508.1   (1)  For the purposes of sections 504 to 508, a peace officer may lay an information by any means of telecommunication that produces a writing.

 Marginal note: Alternative to oath
 (2)  A peace officer who uses a means of telecommunication referred to in subsection (1) shall, instead of swearing an oath, make a statement in writing stating that all matters contained in the information are true to the officer’s knowledge and belief, and such a statement is deemed to be a statement made under oath.

 1997, c. 18, s. 56

 Marginal note: Summons
 509   (1)  A summons issued under this Part shall
 (a)  be directed to the accused;

 (b)  set out briefly the offence in respect of which the accused is charged; and

 (c)  require the accused to attend court at a time and place to be stated therein and to attend thereafter as required by the court in order to be dealt with according to law.

 Marginal note: Service on individual
 (2)  A summons shall be served by a peace officer who shall deliver it personally to the person to whom it is directed or, if that person cannot conveniently be found, shall leave it for him at his latest or usual place of abode with an inmate thereof who appears to be at least sixteen years of age.

 Marginal note: Proof of service
 (3)  Service of a summons may be proved by the oral evidence, given under oath, of the peace officer who served it or by his affidavit made before a justice or other person authorized to administer oaths or to take affidavits.

 Marginal note: Content of summons
 (4)  There shall be set out in every summons the text of subsection 145(4) and section 510.

 Marginal note: Attendance for purposes of Identification of Criminals Act
 (5)  A summons may require the accused to appear at a time and place stated in it for the purposes of the Identification of Criminals Act , where the accused is alleged to have committed an indictable offence and, in the case of an offence designated as a contravention under the Contraventions Act , the Attorney General, within the meaning of that Act, has not made an election under section 50 of that Act.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 509
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 80
 1992, c. 47, s. 71
 1996, c. 7, s. 38

 Marginal note: Failure to appear
 510  Where an accused who is required by a summons to appear at a time and place stated in it for the purposes of the Identification of Criminals Act does not appear at that time and place and, in the case of an offence designated as a contravention under the Contraventions Act, the Attorney General, within the meaning of that Act, has not made an election under section 50 of that Act, a justice may issue a warrant for the arrest of the accused for the offence with which the accused is charged.
 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 510
 1992, c. 47, s. 72
 1996, c. 7, s. 38

 Marginal note: Contents of warrant to arrest
 511   (1)  A warrant issued under this Part shall
 (a)  name or describe the accused;

 (b)  set out briefly the offence in respect of which the accused is charged; and

 (c)  order that the accused be forthwith arrested and brought before the judge or justice who issued the warrant or before some other judge or justice having jurisdiction in the same territorial division, to be dealt with according to law.

 Marginal note: No return day
 (2)  A warrant issued under this Part remains in force until it is executed and need not be made returnable at any particular time.

 Marginal note: Discretion to postpone execution
 (3)  Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(c), a judge or justice who issues a warrant may specify in the warrant the period before which the warrant shall not be executed, to allow the accused to appear voluntarily before a judge or justice having jurisdiction in the territorial division in which the warrant was issued.

 Marginal note: Deemed execution of warrant
 (4)  Where the accused appears voluntarily for the offence in respect of which the accused is charged, the warrant is deemed to be executed.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 511
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 81
 1997, c. 18, s. 57

 Marginal note: Certain actions not to preclude issue of warrant
 512   (1)  A justice may, where the justice has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that it is necessary in the public interest to issue a summons or a warrant for the arrest of the accused, issue a summons or warrant, notwithstanding that
 (a)  an appearance notice or a promise to appear or a recognizance entered into before an officer in charge or another peace officer has been confirmed or cancelled under subsection 508(1);

 (b)  a summons has previously been issued under subsection 507(4); or

 (c)  the accused has been released unconditionally or with the intention of compelling his appearance by way of summons.

 Marginal note: Warrant in default of appearance
 (2)  Where
 (a)  service of a summons is proved and the accused fails to attend court in accordance with the summons,

 (b)  an appearance notice or a promise to appear or a recognizance entered into before an officer in charge or another peace officer has been confirmed under subsection 508(1) and the accused fails to attend court in accordance therewith in order to be dealt with according to law, or

 (c)  it appears that a summons cannot be served because the accused is evading service,

 a justice may issue a warrant for the arrest of the accused.

 R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 512
 R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 82
 1997, c. 18, s. 58

 Marginal note: Formalities of warrant
 513  A warrant in accordance with this Part shall be directed to the peace officers within the territorial jurisdiction of the justice, judge or court by whom or by which it is issued.
 R.S., c. 2(2nd Supp.), s. 5

 Marginal note: Execution of warrant
 514   (1)  A warrant in accordance with this Part may be executed by arresting the accused
 (a)  wherever he is found within the territorial jurisdiction of the justice, judge or court by whom or by which the warrant was issued; or

 (b)  wherever he is found in Canada, in the case of fresh pursuit.

 Marginal note: By whom warrant may be executed
 (2)  A warrant in accordance with this Part may be executed by a person who is one of the peace officers to whom it is directed, whether or not the place in which the warrant is to be executed is within the territory for which the person is a peace officer.

 R.S., c. 2(2nd Supp.), s. 5

 Judicial Interim Release
 Marginal note: Order of release
 515   (1)  Subject to this section, where an accused who is charged with an offence other than an offence listed in section 469 is taken before a justice, the justice shall, unless a plea of guilty by the accused is accepted, order, in respect of that offence, that the accused be released on his giving an undertaking without conditions, unless the prosecutor, having been given a reasonable opportunity to do so, shows cause, in respect of that offence, why the detention of the accused in custody is justified or why an order under any other provision of this section should be made and where the justice makes an order under any other provision of this section, the order shall refer only to the particular offence for which the accused was taken before the justice.

 Marginal note: Release on undertaking with conditions, etc.
 (2)  Where the justice does not make an order under subsection (1), he shall, unless the prosecutor shows cause why the detention of the accused is justified, order that the accused be released
 (a)  on his giving an undertaking with such conditions as the justice directs;

 (b)  on his entering into a recognizance before the justice, without sureties, in such amount and with such conditions, if any, as the justice directs but without deposit of money or other valuable security;

 (c)  on his entering into a recognizance before the justice with sureties in such amount and with such conditions, if any, as the justice directs but without deposit of money or other valuable security;

 (d)  with the consent of the prosecutor, on his entering into a recognizance before the justice, without sureties, in such amount and with such conditions, if any, as the justice directs and on his depositing with the justice such sum of money or other valuable security as the justice directs; or

 (e)  if the accused is not ordinarily resident in the province in which the accused is in custody or does not ordinarily reside within two hundred kilometres of the place in which he is in custody, on his entering into a recognizance before the justice with or without sureties in such amount and with such conditions, if any, as the justice directs, and on his depositing with the justice such sum of money or other valuable security as the justice directs.

 Marginal note: Power of justice to name sureties in order
 (2.1)  Where, pursuant to subsection (2) or any other provision of this Act, a justice, judge or court orders that an accused be released on his entering into a recognizance with sureties, the justice, judge or court may, in the order, name particular persons as sureties.

 Marginal note: Alternative to physical presence
 (2.2)  Where, by this Act, the appearance of an accused is required for the purposes of judicial interim release, the appearance shall be by actual physical attendance of the accused but the justice may, subject to subsection (2.3), allow the accused to appear by means of any suitable telecommunication device, including telephone, that is satisfactory to the justice.

 Marginal note: Where consent required
 (2.3)  The consent of the prosecutor and the accused is required for the purposes of an appearance if the evidence of a witness is to be taken at the appearance and the accused cannot appear by closed-circuit television or any other means that allow the court and the accused to engage in simultaneous visual and oral communication.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (3)  The justice shall not make an order under any of paragraphs (2)(b) to (e) unless the prosecution shows cause why an order under the immediately preceding paragraph should not be made.

 Marginal note: Conditions authorized
 (4)  The justice may direct as conditions under subsection (2) that the accused shall do any one or more of the following things as specified in the order:
 (a)  report at times to be stated in the order to a peace officer or other person designated in the order;

 (b)  remain within a territorial jurisdiction specified in the order;

 (c)  notify the peace officer or other person designated under paragraph (a) of any change in his address or his employment or occupation;

 (d)  abstain from communicating, directly or indirectly, with any victim, witness or other person identified in the order, or refrain from going to any place specified in the order, except in accordance with the conditions specified in the order that the justice considers necessary;

 (e)  where the accused is the holder of a passport, deposit his passport as specified in the order;

 (e.1)  comply with any other condition specified in the order that the justice considers necessary to ensure the safety and security of any victim of or witness to the offence; and

 (f)  comply with such other reasonable conditions specified in the order as the justice considers desirable.

 Marginal note: Condition prohibiting possession of firearms, etc.
 (4.1)  When making an order under subsection (2), in the case of an accused who is charged with
 (a)  an offence in the commission of which violence against a person was used, threatened or attempted,

 (a.1)  a terrorism offence,

 (b)  an offence under section 264 (criminal harassment),

 (b.1)  an offence under section 423.1 (intimidation of a justice system participant),

 (c)  an offence relating to the contravention of subsection 5(3) or (4), 6(3) or 7(2) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act ,

 (d)  an offence that involves, or the subject-matter of which is, a firearm, a cross-bow, a prohibited weapon, a restricted weapon, a prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or an explosive substance, or

 (e)  an offence under subsection 20(1) of the Security of Information Act , or an offence under subsection 21(1) or 22(1) or section 23 of that Act that is committed in relation to on offence under subsection 20(1) of that Act,

 the justice shall add to the order a condition prohibiting the accused from possessing a firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive substance, or all those things, until the accused is dealt with according to law unless the justice considers that such a condition is not required in the interests of the safety of the accused or the safety and security of a victim of the offence or of any other person.

 Marginal note: Surrender, etc.
 (4.11)  Where the justice adds a condition described in subsection (4.1) to an order made under subsection (2), the justice shall specify in the order the manner and method by which
 (a)  the things referred to in subsection (4.1) that are in the possession of the accused shall be surrendered, disposed of, detained, stored or dealt with; and

 (b)  the authorizations, licences and registration certificates held by the person shall be surrendered.

 Marginal note: Reasons
 (4.12)  Where the justice does not add a condition described in subsection (4.1) to an order made under subsection (2), the justice shall include in the record a statement of the reasons for not adding the condition.

 Marginal note: Additional conditions
 (4.2)  Before making an order under subsection (2), in the case of an accused who is charged with an offence referred to in subsection (4.3), the justice shall consider whether it is desirable, in the interests of the safety and security of any person, particularly a victim of or witness to the offence or a justice system participant, to include as a condition of the order
 (a)  that the accused abstain from communicating, directly or indirectly, with any victim, witness or other person identified in the order, or refrain from going to any place specified in the order; or

 (b)  that the accused comply with any other condition specified in the order that the justice considers necessary to ensure the safety and security of those persons.

 Marginal note: Offences
 (4.3)  The offences for the purposes of subsection (4.2) are
 (a)  a terrorism offence;

 (b)  an offence described in section 264 or 423.1;

 (c)  an offence in the commission of which violence against a person was used, threatened or attempted; and

 (d)  an offence under subsection 20(1) of the Security of Information Act , or an offence under subsection 21(1) or 22(1) or section 23 of that Act that is committed in relation to an offence under subsection 20(1) of that Act.

 Marginal note: Detention in custody
 (5)  Where the prosecutor shows cause why the detention of the accused in custody is justified, the justice shall order that the accused be detained in custody until he is dealt with according to law and shall include in the record a statement of his reasons for making the order.

 Marginal note: Order of detention
 (6)  Notwithstanding any provision of this section, where an accused is charged
 (a)  with an indictable offence, other than an offence listed in section 469,
 (i)  that is alleged to have been committed while at large after being released in respect of another indictable offence pursuant to the provisions of this Part or section 679 or 680,

 (ii)  that is an offence under section 467.11, 467.12 or 467.13, or a serious offence alleged to have been committed for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with, a criminal organization,

 (iii)  that is an offence under any of sections 83.02 to 83.04 and 83.18 to 83.23 or otherwise is alleged to be a terrorism offence,

 (iv)  an offence under subsection 16(1) or (2), 17(1), 19(1), 20(1) or 22(1) of the Security of Information Act , or

 (v)  an offence under subsection 21(1) or 22(1) or section 23 of the Security of Information Act that is committed in relation to on offence referred to in subparagraph (iv),

 (b)  with an indictable offence, other than an offence listed in section 469 and is not ordinarily resident in Canada,

 (c)  with an offence under any of subsections 145(2) to (5) that is alleged to have been committed while he was at large after being released in respect of another offence pursuant to the provisions of this Part or section 679, 680 or 816, or

 (d)  with having committed an offence punishable by imprisonment for life under subsection 5(3), 6(3) or 7(2) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act or the offence of conspiring to commit such an offence,

 the justice shall order that the accused be detained in custody until he is dealt with according to law, unless the accused, having been given a reasonable opportunity to do so, shows cause why his detention in custody is not justified, but where the justice orders that the accused be released, he shall include in the record a statement of his reasons for making the order.

 Marginal note: Order of release
 (7)  Where an accused to whom paragraph 6(a), (c) or (d) applies shows cause why the accused’s detention in custody is not justified, the justice shall order that the accused be released on giving an undertaking or entering into a recognizance described in any of paragraphs (2)(a) to (e) with the conditions described in subsections (4) to (4.2) or, where the accused was at large on an undertaking or recognizance with conditions, the additional conditions described in subsections (4) to (4.2), that the justice considers desirable, unless the accused, having been given a reasonable opportunity to do so, shows cause why the conditions or additional conditions should not be imposed.

 Marginal note: Idem
 (8)  Where an accused to whom paragraph (6)(b) applies shows cause why the accused’s detention in custody is not justified, the justice shall order that the accused be released on giving an undertaking or entering into a recognizance described in any of paragraphs (2)(a) to (e) with the conditions, described in subsections (4) to (4.2), that the justice considers desirable.

 Marginal note: Sufficiency of record