   908
c.m. callow inc. v. zollinger

   C.M. Callow Inc. Appellant

   v.

   Tammy Zollinger,
   Condominium Management Group,
   Carleton Condominium Corporation No. 703,
   Carleton Condominium Corporation No. 726,
   Carleton Condominium Corporation No. 742,
   Carleton Condominium Corporation No. 765,
   Carleton Condominium Corporation No. 783,
   Carleton Condominium Corporation No. 791,
   Carleton Condominium Corporation No. 806,
   Carleton Condominium Corporation No. 826,
   Carleton Condominium Corporation No. 839
   and
   Carleton Condominium Corporation No. 877
   Respondents

   and

   Canadian Federation of Independent
   Business and
   Canadian Chamber of Commerce
   Interveners

   Indexed as: C.M. Callow Inc. v. Zollinger
   2020 SCC 45
   File No.: 38463.
   2019: December 6; 2020: December 18.
   Present: Wagner C.J. and Abella, Moldaver,
   Karakatsanis, Côté, Brown, Rowe, Martin and Kasirer
   JJ.

   ON APPEAL FROM THE COURT OF APPEAL FOR
   ONTARIO
      Contracts — Breach — Performance — Duty of honest
   performance — Clause in winter maintenance agreement
    permitting unilateral termination of contract without
   cause upon 10 days’ notice — Contract terminated by
   condominium corporations with required notice to contractor
    — Contractor suing for breach of contract — Trial
   judge finding that statements and conduct by condominium
909
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


corporations actively deceived contractor and led it to
believe contract would not be terminated — Trial judge
awarding damages for breach of contract — Whether
exercise of termination clause constituted breach of duty
of honest performance.
    In 2012, a group of condominium corporations
(“Baycrest”) entered into a two-year winter maintenance
contract and into a separate summer maintenance contract
with C.M. Callow Inc. (“Callow”). Pursuant to clause 9
of the winter maintenance contract, Baycrest was entitled
to terminate that agreement if Callow failed to give satisfactory
 service in accordance with its terms. Clause 9 also
provided that if, for any other reason, Callow’s services
were no longer required, Baycrest could terminate the
contract upon giving 10 days’ written notice.
    In early 2013, Baycrest decided to terminate the winter
maintenance agreement but chose not to inform Callow
of its decision at that time. Throughout the spring and
summer of 2013, Callow had discussions with Baycrest
regarding a renewal of the winter maintenance agreement.
Following those discussions, Callow thought that it was
likely to get a two-year renewal of the winter maintenance
contract and that Baycrest was satisfied with its services.
During the summer of 2013, Callow performed work
above and beyond the summer maintenance contract at
no charge, which it hoped would act as an incentive for
Baycrest to renew the winter maintenance agreement.
    Baycrest informed Callow of its decision to terminate
 the winter maintenance agreement in September
2013. Callow filed a statement of claim for breach of
contract, alleging that Baycrest acted in bad faith. The
trial judge held that the organizing principle of good faith
performance and the duty of honest performance were
engaged. She was satisfied that Baycrest actively deceived
Callow from the time the termination decision was made
to September 2013, and found that Baycrest acted in bad
faith by withholding that information to ensure Callow
performed the summer maintenance contract and by continuing
 to represent that the contract was not in danger
despite knowing that Callow was taking on extra tasks
to bolster the chances of the winter maintenance contract
being renewed. She awarded damages to Callow in order
to place it in the same position as if the breach had not
occurred. The Court of Appeal set aside the judgment at
first instance, holding that the trial judge erred by improperly
 expanding the duty of honest performance beyond the
910


terms of the winter maintenance agreement. Further, it
held that any deception in the communications during the
summer of 2013 related to a new contract not yet in existence
, namely the renewal that Callow hoped to negotiate,
and therefore was not directly linked to the performance
of the winter contract.
   Held (Côté J. dissenting): The appeal should be allowed
and the judgment of the trial judge reinstated.
    Per Wagner C.J. and Abella, Karakatsanis, Martin and
Kasirer JJ. : The duty to act honestly in the performance
of the contract precluded the active deception by Baycrest
by which it knowingly misled Callow into believing that
the winter maintenance agreement would not be terminated
. By exercising the termination clause dishonestly, it
breached the duty of honesty on a matter directly linked
to the performance of the contract, even if the 10-day
notice period was satisfied. Accordingly, the Court of
Appeal should not have interfered with the conclusions
of the trial judge.
     The duty of honest performance in contract, formulated
 in Bhasin v. Hrynew, 2014 SCC 71, [2014] 3 S.C.R.
494, applies to all contracts and requires that parties must
not lie or otherwise knowingly mislead each other about
matters directly linked to the performance of the contract.
 In determining whether dishonesty is connected to a given
 contract, the relevant question is whether a right under that
 contract was exercised, or an obligation under that contract
 was performed, dishonestly. While the duty of honest performance
  is not to be equated with a positive obligation
 of disclosure, in circumstances where a contracting party
 lies to or knowingly misleads another, a lack of a positive
 obligation of disclosure does not preclude an obligation
 to correct a false impression created through that party’s
 own actions.
    The organizing principle of good faith recognized in
Bhasin is not a free-standing rule, but instead manifests
itself through existing good faith doctrines. While the
duty of honest performance and the duty to exercise discretionary
 powers in good faith are distinct, like each of
the different manifestations of the organizing principle,
they should not be thought of as disconnected from one
another. The duty of honest performance shares a common
911
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


methodology with the duty to exercise contractual discretionary
 powers in good faith by fixing on the wrongful
exercise of a contractual prerogative. Each of the specific
legal doctrines derived from the organizing principle rest
on a requirement of justice that a contracting party have
appropriate regard to the legitimate contractual interests of
their counterparty. They need not subvert their own interests
 to those of the counterparty by acting as a fiduciary or
in a selfless manner. This requirement of justice reflects the
notion that the bargain, the rights and obligations agreed
to, is the first source of fairness between parties to a contract
. Those rights and obligations must be exercised and
performed honestly and reasonably and not capriciously
or arbitrarily where recognized by law.
    The duty of honesty as contractual doctrine has a limiting
 function on the exercise of an otherwise complete
and clear right since the duty, irrespective of the intention
of the parties, applies to the performance of all contracts,
and by extension, to all contractual obligations and rights.
Instead of constraining the decision to terminate in and
of itself, the duty of honest performance attracts damages
where the manner in which the right was exercised was
dishonest. This focus on the manner in which the termination
 right was exercised should not be confused with
whether the right could be exercised. No contractual right,
including a termination right, can be exercised dishonestly
and, as such, contrary to the requirements of good faith.
   The requirements of honesty in performance can go
further than prohibiting outright lies. Whether or not a
party has knowingly misled its counterparty is a highly
fact-specific determination, and can include lies, half-
truths, omissions, and even silence, depending on the
circumstances. One can mislead through action, by saying
something directly to its counterparty, or through inaction,
by failing to correct a misapprehension caused by one’s
own misleading conduct.
     The duty of honest performance is a contract law
doctrine, not a tort and therefore a nexus with the contractual
  relationship is required. A breach must be directly
 linked to the performance of the contract. The framework
 for abuse of rights in Quebec is useful to illustrate the
 required direct link between dishonesty and performance
 from Bhasin. Authorities from Quebec serve as persuasive
 authority and comparison between the common law and
 civil law as they evolve in Canada is a particularly useful
912


and familiar exercise for the Court. Like in the Quebec
civil law, no contractual right may be exercised dishonestly
and therefore contrary to the requirements of good faith.
The direct link exists when the party performs their obligation
 or exercises their right under the contract dishonestly.
While the duty of honest performance has similarities
with civil fraud and estoppel, it is not subsumed by them.
Unlike estoppel and civil fraud, the duty of honest performance
 does not require a defendant to intend that the
plaintiff rely on their representation or false statement.
     The duty of honest performance attracts damages
according to the ordinary contractual measure. The ordinary
  approach is to award contractual damages corresponding
  to the expectation interest. That is, damages
 should put the injured party in the position that it would
 have been in had the duty been performed. Although reliance
  damages, which are the ordinary measure of damages
 in tort, and expectation damages will be the same in many
 if not most cases, they are conceptually distinct, and there
 is no basis to hold that a breach of the duty of honest
 performance should in general be compensated by way
 of reliance damages.
    In the instant case, Baycrest knowingly misled Callow
in the manner in which it exercised clause 9 of the winter
maintenance agreement and this wrongful exercise of the
termination clause amounts to a breach of contract. Even
though Baycrest had what was, on its face, an unfettered
right to terminate the winter maintenance agreement on
10 days’ notice, the right had to be exercised in keeping
with the duty to act honestly. Baycrest’s deception was
directly linked to this contract, because its exercise of the
termination clause was dishonest. It may not have had a
free-standing obligation to disclose its intention to terminate
, but it nonetheless had an obligation to refrain from
misleading Callow in the exercise of that clause. Baycrest
had to refrain from false representations in anticipation of
the notice period. If someone is led to believe that their
counterparty is content with their work and their ongoing
 contract is likely to be renewed, it is reasonable for
that person to infer that the ongoing contract is in good
standing and will not be terminated early. Having failed to
correct Callow’s misapprehension that arose due to these
913
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


false representations, Baycrest breached its duty of good
faith in the exercise of its right of termination. Damages
thus flow for the consequential loss of opportunity. While
damages are to be measured against a defendant’s least
onerous means of performance, the least onerous means
of performance in this case would have been to correct
the misrepresentation once Baycrest knew Callow had
drawn a false inference. Had it done so, Callow would
have had the opportunity to secure another contract for
the upcoming winter.
    Per Moldaver, Brown and Rowe JJ.: As a universally
applicable minimum standard, all contracts must be performed
 honestly. Contracting parties may therefore not
lie to, or otherwise knowingly mislead, each other about
matters directly linked to performance. If a plaintiff suffers
loss in reliance on its counterparty’s misleading conduct,
the duty of honest performance serves to make the plaintiff
whole. It does not, however, impose a duty of loyalty or of
disclosure or require a party to forego advantages flowing
from the contract. The dividing line between (1) actively
misleading conduct, and (2) permissible non-disclosure
has been clearly demarcated by cases addressing misrepresentation
 and the same settled principles apply to
the duty of honest performance, although it also applies
(unlike misrepresentation) to representations made after
contract formation.
    There is, in the context of misrepresentation, a rich law
accepting that sometimes silence or half-truths amount to
a statement. Although contracting parties have no duty
to disclose material information, a contracting party may
not create a misleading picture about its contractual performance
 by relying on half-truths or partial disclosure.
Representations need not take the form of an express
statement. So long as it is clearly communicated, it may
comprise other acts or conduct on the part of the defendant
. The entire context, which includes the nature of the
parties’ relationship, is to be considered in determining,
objectively, whether the defendant made a representation
to the plaintiff. The question is whether the defendant’s
active conduct contributed to a misapprehension that could
be corrected only by disclosing additional information.
Contracting parties are required to correct representations
 that are subsequently rendered false, or which the
representor later discovers were erroneous. The question
of whether a representation has been made is a question
914


of mixed fact and law, subject to appellate review only for
palpable and overriding error.
    The legal aim in remedying a breach of contract is to
give the innocent party the full benefit of the bargain by
placing it in the position it would have occupied had the
contract been performed. But the justification for awarding
expectation damages does not apply to breach of the duty
of honest performance. In such cases, the issue is not that
the defendant has failed to perform the contract, thereby
defeating the plaintiff’s expectations. It is, rather, that the
defendant has performed the contract, but has also caused
the plaintiff loss by making dishonest extra-contractual
misrepresentations concerning that performance, upon
which the plaintiff relied to its detriment. The plaintiff’s
complaint is not lost value of performance, but detrimental
 reliance on dishonest misrepresentations. The interest
being protected is not an expectation interest, but a reliance
 interest. And just as these are unrelated interests, an
expectation measure of damage is unrelated to the breach
of the duty of honest performance.
    Much like estoppel and civil fraud, the duty of honest
performance vindicates the plaintiff’s reliance interest. A
contracting party that breaches this duty will be liable to
compensate its counterparty for any foreseeable losses
suffered in reliance on the misleading representations. The
duty of honest performance is not subsumed by estoppel
and civil fraud; rather, it protects the reliance interest in a
distinct and broader manner since the defendant may be
held liable even where it does not intend for the plaintiff
to rely on the misleading representation. Irrespective of the
defendant’s intention, all a plaintiff need show is that, but
for its reliance on the misleading representation, it would
not have sustained the loss.
   Disposing of the present case is a simple matter of
applying the Court’s decision in Bhasin; Callow’s claim
should be resolved by applying only the duty of honest
performance. There is no basis for disturbing the trial
judge’s conclusions. Baycrest’s conduct did not fall on
the side of innocent non-disclosure. The trial judge found
that active communications between the parties deceived
915
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


Callow. Baycrest identifies no palpable and overriding
error to justify overturning these conclusions. The proper
measure of damages represents the loss Callow suffered in
reliance on Baycrest’s misleading representations.
    The majority relies on the civilian concept of “abuse
of rights” in its analysis. In so doing, it departs from the
Court’s accepted practice in respect of comparative legal
analysis. The principles that apply to this appeal are determinative
 and settled. Canada’s common law and civil
law systems have adopted very different approaches to
the place of good faith in contract law. The majority’s
reliance on the civilian doctrine of abuse of a right distorts
the analysis in Bhasin and elides the distinction between
honest performance and good faith in the exercise of a
contractual discretion.
     Courts should draw on external legal concepts only
where domestic law does not provide an answer or where
it is necessary to modify or otherwise develop an existing
legal rule. Courts may also look to the experience of other
legal systems in considering whether a potential solution
to a legal problem will result in negative consequences,
or to observe that a domestic legal concept mirrors one
found in another system. Even where comparative analysis
 is appropriate, it must be undertaken with care and
circumspection. The golden rule in using concepts from
one of Canada’s legal systems to modify the other is that
the proposed solution must be able to completely and
coherently integrate into the adopting system’s structure.
   Per Côté J. (dissenting): The appeal should be dismissed
. Callow’s recourse cannot be based on a breach
of the duty of honest performance. Although Baycrest’s
conduct may not be laudable, it does not fall within the
category of active dishonesty prohibited by that duty.
   The duty of honest performance is described in Bhasin
as a simple requirement not to lie or knowingly mislead
about matters directly linked to performance of the contract
. The requirement that parties not lie is straightforward
; however, the kind of conduct covered by the
requirement that they not otherwise knowingly mislead
each other is not. The law imposes neither a duty of loyalty
916


or of disclosure nor a requirement to forego advantages
flowing from the contract on a contracting party. Absent
a duty to disclose, it is far from obvious when exactly
one’s silence will knowingly mislead the other contracting
party or at what point a permissible silence turns into a
non-permissible silence that may constitute a breach of
contract. In any event, the duty of honest performance
should remain clear and easy to apply.
    The obligations flowing from the duty of honest performance
 are negative obligations. Extending the duty
beyond that scope would detract from certainty in commercial
 dealings. Therefore, silence cannot be considered
dishonest within the meaning of Bhasin unless there is a
positive obligation to speak. Such an obligation does not
arise simply because a party to a contract realizes that his
counterparty is operating under a mistaken belief. Absent
a duty of disclosure, a party to a contract has no obligation
to correct his counterparty’s mistaken belief unless the
party’s active conduct has materially contributed to it.
What constitutes a material contribution will obviously
depend upon the context, which includes the nature of
the parties’ relationship as well as the relevant provisions
of the contract. Parties that prefer not to disclose certain
information — which they are entitled not to do — are
not required to adopt a new line of conduct in their contractual
 relationship simply because they chose silence
over speech.
    In the context of a right to terminate a contract without
cause, a party that intends to end an agreement does not
have to convey hints in order to alert his counterparty that
their business relationship is in danger. No obligation to
speak arises when a party becomes aware of his counterparty
’s mistaken belief that the contract will not be
terminated unless the party has taken positive action that
materially contributed to that belief. If one party leads
another to believe that their contract will be renewed, it
follows that the other party can reasonably expect their
business relationship to be extended rather than terminated
. But an inference to that effect cannot be drawn
in the abstract. In order to infer that one party, through
discussions about renewal, led the other party to think that
there was no risk their existing agreement would be terminated
, the inference-drawing process must obviously take
into account the nature of the risk at stake and what was actually
 communicated during those discussions. Otherwise,
917
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


the inference would entail a palpable and overriding error
that would be subject to appellate review.
     In the present case, Baycrest bargained for a right to
terminate its winter agreement for any reason and at any
time upon giving 10 days’ notice. In her assessment of
Baycrest’s conduct, the trial judge did not ask herself if
Baycrest lied or otherwise knowingly misled Callow about
the exercise of its right to terminate the winter agreement
for any other reason than unsatisfactory services. She
wrongfully insisted on addressing alleged performance
issues despite the fact that the winter agreement could be
terminated even if Callow’s services were satisfactory. The
trial judge also did not consider that the active deception
had to be directly linked to the performance of the contract.
It is clear that the representations she found had been made
by Baycrest were not directly linked to the performance of
the winter agreement. The trial judge’s misunderstanding
of the applicable legal principles vitiated the fact-finding
process.

Cases Cited
By Kasirer J.
   Applied: Bhasin v. Hrynew, 2014 SCC 71, [2014] 3
S.C.R. 494; referred to: Canadian National Railway Co.
v. Norsk Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021;
Deloitte & Touche v. Livent Inc. (Receiver of), 2017 SCC
63, [2017] 2 S.C.R. 855; Kingstreet Investments Ltd. v.
New Brunswick (Finance), 2007 SCC 1, [2007] 1 S.C.R.
3; Farber v. Royal Trust Co., [1997] 1 S.C.R. 846; St.
Lawrence Cement Inc. v. Barrette, 2008 SCC 64, [2008]
3 S.C.R. 392; Bou Malhab v. Diffusion Métromédia CMR
inc., 2011 SCC 9, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 214; Potter v. New
Brunswick Legal Aid Services Commission, 2015 SCC 10,
[2015] 1 S.C.R. 500; Wallace v. United Grain Growers
Ltd., [1997] 3 S.C.R. 701; Churchill Falls (Labrador)
Corp. v. Hydro-Québec, 2018 SCC 46, [2018] 3 S.C.R.
101; Houle v. Canadian National Bank, [1990] 3 S.C.R.
122; Mayor of Bradford v. Pickles, [1895] A.C. 587;
Allen v. Flood, [1898] A.C. 1; United Roasters, Inc. v.
Colgate-Palmolive Co., 649 F.2d 985 (4th Cir. 1981);
IFP Technologies (Canada) Inc. v. EnCana Midstream
and Marketing, 2017 ABCA 157, 53 Alta. L.R. (6th) 96;
Xerex Exploration Ltd. v. Petro-Canada, 2005 ABCA 224,
47 Alta. L.R. (4th) 6; Yam Seng Pte Ltd. v. International
Trade Corp. Ltd., [2013] E.W.H.C. 111, [2013] 1 All
E.R. (Comm.) 1321; Dunning v. Royal Bank (1996), 23
918


C.C.E.L. (2d) 71; Honda Canada Inc. v. Keays, 2008
SCC 39, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 362; Atlantic Lottery Corp. Inc.
v. Babstock, 2020 SCC 19, [2020] 2 S.C.R. 420; PreMD
Inc. v. Ogilvy Renault LLP, 2013 ONCA 412, 309 O.A.C.
139; Hamilton v. Open Window Bakery Ltd., 2004 SCC 9,
[2004] 1 S.C.R. 303; Lamb v. Kincaid (1907), 38 S.C.R.
516.
By Brown J.
    Applied: Bhasin v. Hrynew, 2014 SCC 71, [2014] 3
S.C.R. 494; referred to: Alevizos v. Nirula, 2003 MBCA
148, 180 Man. R. (2d) 186; Xerex Exploration Ltd. v. Petro-
Canada, 2005 ABCA 224, 47 Alta. L.R. (4th) 6; Opron
Construction Co. v. Alberta (1994), 151 A.R. 241; Peek v.
Gurney (1873), L.R. 6 H.L. 377; Outaouais Synergest Inc.
v. Lang Michener LLP, 2013 ONCA 526, 116 O.R. (3d)
742; C.R.F. Holdings Ltd. v. Fundy Chemical International
Ltd. (1981), 33 B.C.L.R. 291; Queen v. Cognos Inc., [1993]
1 S.C.R. 87; Styles v. Alberta Investment Management
Corp., 2017 ABCA 1, 44 Alta. L.R. (6th) 214; Mohamed
v. Information Systems Architects Inc., 2018 ONCA 428,
423 D.L.R. (4th) 174; Greenberg v. Meffert (1985), 50
O.R. (2d) 755; Mesa Operating Ltd. Partnership v. Amoco
Canada Resources Ltd. (1994), 19 Alta. L.R. (3d) 38;
Fidler v. Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada, 2006 SCC
30, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 3; Hamilton v. Open Window Bakery
Ltd., 2004 SCC 9, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 303; Wood v. Grand
Valley Rway. Co. (1915), 51 S.C.R. 283; Lamb v. Kincaid
(1907), 38 S.C.R. 516; Reference re Supreme Court Act,
ss. 5 and 6, 2014 SCC 21, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 433; Caisse
populaire des Deux Rives v. Société mutuelle d’assurance
contre l’incendie de la Vallée du Richelieu, [1990] 2 S.C.R.
995; Gilles E. Néron Communication Marketing Inc. v.
Chambre des notaires du Québec, 2004 SCC 53, [2004]
3 S.C.R. 95; Moses v. Macferlan (1760), 2 Burr. 1005, 97
E.R. 676; Garland v. Consumers’ Gas Co., 2004 SCC 25,
[2004] 1 S.C.R. 629; Canadian National Railway Co. v.
Norsk Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021; Bou
Malhab v. Diffusion Métromédia CMR inc., 2011 SCC
9, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 214; Saadati v. Moorhead, 2017 SCC
28, [2017] 1 S.C.R. 543; Deloitte & Touche v. Livent
Inc. (Receiver of), 2017 SCC 63, [2017] 2 S.C.R. 855;
Kingstreet Investments Ltd. v. New Brunswick (Finance),
2007 SCC 1, [2007] 1 S.C.R. 3; St. Lawrence Cement
Inc. v. Barrette, 2008 SCC 64, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 392; Sport
Maska Inc. v. Zittrer, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 564; Colonial Real
Estate Co. v. La Communauté des Soeurs de la Charité
de l’Hôpital Général de Montréal (1918), 57 S.C.R. 585;
Birdair inc. v. Danny’s Construction Co., 2013 QCCA
580; Bhasin v. Hrynew, 2011 ABQB 637, 526 A.R. 1;
919
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


Atlantic Lottery Corp. Inc. v. Babstock, 2020 SCC 19,
[2020] 2 S.C.R. 420.
By Côté J. (dissenting)
  Bhasin v. Hrynew, 2014 SCC 71, [2014] 3 S.C.R. 494;
Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235.

Statutes and Regulations Cited
Civil Code of Québec, arts. 6, 7, 1375.

Authors Cited
Allard, France. The Supreme Court of Canada and its
   Impact on the Expression of Bijuralism. Ottawa:
   Department of Justice, 2001.
Atiyah’s Introduction to the Law of Contract, 6th ed. by
   Stephen A. Smith. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2006.
Bastarache, Michel. “Bijuralism in Canada”, in Bijuralism
   and Harmonization: Genesis. Ottawa: Department of
   Justice, 2001.
Baudouin, Jean-Louis. “L’interprétation du Code civil
   québécois par la Cour suprême du Canada” (1975), 53
   Can. Bar Rev. 715.
Baudouin, Jean-Louis. “Mixed Jurisdictions: A Model for
   the XXIst Century?” (2003), 63 La. L. Rev. 983.
Baudouin, Jean-Louis, et Pierre-Gabriel Jobin. Les obligations
   , 7e éd. par Pierre-Gabriel Jobin et Nathalie Vézina.
   Cowansville, Que.: Yvon Blais, 2013.
Benson, Peter. Justice in Transactions: A Theory of
   Contract Law. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
   Press, 2019.
Bridge, Michael. “The Exercise of Contractual Discretion”
   (2019), 135 L.Q.R. 227.
Brierley, John E. C. “Quebec’s ‘Common Laws’ (Droits
   Communs): How Many Are There?”, in Ernest Caparros
   et al., eds., Mélanges Louis-Philippe Pigeon. Montréal:
   Wilson & Lafleur, 1989, 109.
Buckwold, Tamara. “The Enforceability of Agreements
   to Negotiate in Good Faith: The Impact of Bhasin v.
   Hrynew and the Organizing Principle of Good Faith
   in Common Law Canada” (2016), 58 Can. Bus. L.J. 1.
Courtney, Wayne. “Good Faith and Termination: The
   English and Australian Experience” (2019), 1 Journal
   of Commonwealth Law 185.
Dainow, Joseph. “The Civil Law and the Common Law:
   Some Points of Comparison” (1967), 15 Am. J. Comp.
   L. 419.
Daly, Paul. “La bonne foi et la common law: l’arrêt Bhasin
   c. Hrynew”, dans Jérémie Torres-Ceyte, Gabriel-Arnaud
920


   Berthold et Charles-Antoine M. Péladeau, dir., Le dialogue
    en droit civil. Montréal: Thémis, 2018, 89.
Dedek, Helge. “From Norms to Facts: The Realization of
   Rights in Common and Civil Private Law” (2010), 56
   McGill L.J. 77.
Fuller, L. L., and William R. Perdue Jr. “The Reliance
   Interest in Contract Damages” (1936), 46 Yale L.J. 52.
Gardner, John. “Concerning Permissive Sources and
   Gaps” (1988), 8 Oxford J. Leg. Stud. 457.
Gaudreault-DesBiens, Jean-François. Les solitudes du
   bijuridisme au Canada. Montréal: Thémis, 2007.
Grégoire, Marie Annick. Liberté, responsabilité et utilité:
   la bonne foi comme instrument de justice. Cowansville,
   Que.: Yvon Blais, 2010.
Gutteridge, H. C. “Abuse of Rights” (1933), 5 Cambridge
   L.J. 22.
Jukier, Rosalie. “The Legacy of Justice Louis LeBel: The
   Civilian Tradition and Procedural Law” (2015), 70
   S.C.L.R. (2d) 27.
Jukier, Rosalie. “Good Faith in Contract: A Judicial
   Dialogue Between Common Law Canada and Québec”
   (2019), 1 Journal of Commonwealth Law 83.
Lawson, F. H. Negligence in the Civil Law. Oxford:
   Clarendon Press, 1950.
LeBel, Louis. “Les cultures de la Cour suprême du
   Canada: vers l’émergence d’une culture dialogique?”,
   dans Jean-François Gaudreault-DesBiens et autres,
   dir., Convergence, concurrence et harmonisation des
   systèmes juridiques. Montréal: Thémis, 2009, 1.
LeBel, Louis, et Pierre-Louis Le Saunier. “L’interaction
   du droit civil et de la common law à la Cour suprême
   du Canada” (2006), 47 C. de D. 179.
Lundmark, Thomas. Charting the Divide between
   Common and Civil Law. New York: Oxford University
   Press, 2012.
MacDougall, Bruce. Misrepresentation. Toronto:
   LexisNexis, 2016.
Maharaj, Krish. “An Action on the Equities: Re-
   Characterizing Bhasin as Equitable Estoppel” (2017),
   55 Alta. L. Rev. 199.
McCamus, John D. “The New General ‘Principle’ of Good
   Faith Performance and the New ‘Rule’ of Honesty in
   Performance in Canadian Contract Law” (2015), 32
   J.C.L. 103.
McCamus, John D. The Law of Contracts, 3rd ed. Toronto:
   Irwin Law, 2020.
McInnes, Mitchell. “The Reason to Reverse: Unjust
   Factors and Juristic Reasons” (2012), 92 B.U.L. Rev.
   1049.
Moore, Benoît. “Brèves remarques spontanées sur l’arrêt
    Bhasin c. Hrynew”, dans Jérémie Torres-Ceyte,
   Gabriel-Arnaud Berthold et Charles-Antoine M.
921
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


   Péladeau, dir., Le dialogue en droit civil. Montréal:
   Thémis, 2018, 81.
Mummé, Claire. “Bhasin v. Hrynew: A New Era for Good
   Faith in Canadian Employment Law, or Just Tinkering
   at the Margins?” (2016), 32 Intl J. Comp. Lab. L. &
   Ind. Rel. 117.
O’Byrne, Shannon, and Ronnie Cohen. “The Contractual
   Principle of Good Faith and the Duty of Honesty in
   Bhasin v. Hrynew” (2015), 53 Alta. L.R. 1.
Pargendler, Mariana. “The Role of the State in Contract
   Law: The Common-Civil Law Divide” (2018), 43 Yale
   J. Intl L. 143.
Peel, Edwin. The Law of Contract, 15th ed. London: Sweet
   & Maxwell, 2020.
Robertson, Joseph T. “Good Faith as an Organizing
   Principle in Contract Law: Bhasin v Hrynew — Two
   Steps Forward and One Look Back” (2015), 93 Can.
   Bar Rev. 809.
Samson, Mélanie. “Le droit civil québécois: exemple d’un
   droit à porosité variable” (2018-19), 50 Ottawa L. Rev.
   257.
Sharpe, Robert J. Good Judgment: Making Judicial
   Decisions. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2018.
Swan, Angela. “The Obligation to Perform in Good Faith:
   Comment on Bhasin v. Hrynew” (2015), 56 Can. Bus.
   L.J. 395.
Swan, Angela, Jakub Adamski and Annie Y. Na. Canadian
   Contract Law, 4th ed. Toronto: LexisNexis, 2018.
Valcke, Catherine. “Bhasin v Hrynew: Why a General
   Duty of Good Faith Would Be Out of Place in
   English Canadian Contract Law” (2019), 1 Journal of
   Commonwealth Law 65.
Waddams, S. M. “Breach of Contract and the Concept of
   Wrongdoing” (2000), 12 S.C.L.R. (2d) 1.
Waddams, S. M. The Law of Contracts, 7th ed. Toronto:
   Thomson Reuters, 2017.
Waddams, S. M. “Unfairness and Good Faith in Contract
   Law: A New Approach” (2017), 80 S.C.L.R. (2d) 309.
Zweigert, Konrad, and Hein Kötz. Introduction to
   Comparative Law, 3rd rev. ed. Oxford: Clarendon
   Press, 1998.

    APPEAL from a judgment of the Ontario Court of
Appeal (Lauwers, Huscroft and Trotter JJ.A.), 2018
ONCA 896, 429 D.L.R. (4th) 704, 86 B.L.R. (5th) 53,
[2018] O.J. No. 5855 (QL), 2018 CarswellOnt 18697
(WL Can.), setting aside a decision of O’Bonsawin
J., 2017 ONSC 7095, [2017] O.J. No. 6176 (QL),
922


2017 CarswellOnt 18587 (WL Can.). Appeal allowed
, Côté J. dissenting.

  Brandon Kain, Adam Goldenberg, Vivian Ntiri
and Miriam Vale Peters, for the appellant.

   Anne Tardif, Rodrigue Escayola and David
Plotkin, for the respondents.

   Catherine Beagan Flood and Nicole Henderson,
for the intervener the Canadian Federation of
Independent Business.

  Jeremy Opolsky and Winston Gee, for the intervener
 the Canadian Chamber of Commerce.

  The judgment of Wagner C.J. and Abella,
Karakatsanis, Martin and Kasirer JJ. was delivered by

     Kasirer J. — Kasirer J

I.

[1] This appeal concerns a clause in a commercial
 winter maintenance agreement that permitted
the clients to terminate the contract unilaterally,
without cause, upon giving the contractor 10 days’
notice. The dispute does not turn on whether the
clause represented a fair bargain between the parties
. There is also no issue about the meaning of
the termination clause. The dispute turns rather
on the manner in which the respondents (collectively
 “Baycrest”) exercised the termination clause.
Acknowledging that 10 days’ notice was given the
appellant, C.M. Callow Inc. (“Callow”), argues that
Baycrest exercised the termination clause contrary
to the requirements of good faith set forth by this
Court in Bhasin v. Hrynew, 2014 SCC 71, [2014]
3 S.C.R. 494, in particular the duty to perform the
contract honestly.

[2] In Bhasin, Cromwell J. recognized a general
organizing principle of good faith, which means that
“parties generally must perform their contractual
duties honestly and reasonably and not capriciously
923
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


or arbitrarily” (para. 63). This organizing principle,
he explained, “is not a free-standing rule, but rather
a standard that underpins and is manifested in more
specific legal doctrines and may be given different
 weight in different situations” (para. 64). The
organizing principle of good faith manifests itself
through “existing doctrines” addressing “the types
of situations and relationships in which the law requires
, in certain respects, honest, candid, forthright
or reasonable contractual performance” (para. 66).

[3] In this appeal, the applicable good faith doctrine
is the duty of honesty in contractual performance. As
Cromwell J. explained in Bhasin, at para. 73, the
duty of honesty applies to all contracts as a matter of
contractual doctrine, and means “simply that parties
must not lie or otherwise knowingly mislead each
other about matters directly linked to the performance
 of the contract”. Callow says Baycrest’s failure
 to exercise its right to terminate in keeping with
the mandatory duty of honest performance amounted
to a breach of contract. It points to the trial judge’s
findings that Baycrest withheld the information that
the contract was in danger of termination. Baycrest
then continued to represent that the contract was
not in danger and knowingly declined to correct
the false impression it had created and under which
Callow was operating. This dishonesty continued for
several months, “in anticipation of the notice period”
wrote the trial judge and, claims Callow, resulted in
it foregoing the opportunity to bid on other winter
contracts and thereby justifies an award of damages
(2017 ONSC 7095, at para. 67 (CanLII)).

[4] Baycrest, for its part, recalling that Cromwell J.
explicitly stated in Bhasin that the duty of honest
performance does not amount to a duty to disclose,
argues that its silence did not constitute dishonesty.
It also says the alleged dishonesty was not connected
to the contract in place at the time because, in its
924


submission, the impugned communications related
to the possibility of a future contract not yet exe-
cuted. The Court of Appeal agreed and overturned
the trial judge’s decision (2018 ONCA 896, 429
D.L.R. (4th) 704).

[5] I respectfully disagree with the Court of Appeal
on whether the manner in which the termination
clause was exercised ran afoul of the minimum
standard of honesty. The duty to act honestly in the
performance of the contract precludes active deception
. Baycrest breached its duty by knowingly
misleading Callow into believing the winter maintenance
 agreement would not be terminated. By exercising
 the termination clause dishonestly, it breached
the duty of honesty on a matter directly linked to
the performance of the contract, even if the 10-day
notice period was satisfied and irrespective of their
motive for termination. For the reasons that follow,
I would allow the appeal and restore the judgment
of the Ontario Superior Court of Justice.

II. Background

[6] Baycrest includes 10 condominium corporations
 managed by Condominium Management
Group and a designated property manager. Each
corporation has its own board of directors to manage
its affairs and, collectively, they established a Joint
Use Committee (“JUC”). The JUC makes decisions
regarding the joint and shared assets of the condominiums
. In 2010, the condominium corporations
entered into a two-year winter maintenance agreement
 with Callow, a corporation owned and operated
by Christopher Callow. Pursuant to the terms of the
agreement, Callow provided winter services, including
 snow removal, to the condominium corporations.

[7] At the conclusion of the two-year term in 2012,
the corporations entered into two new agreements
with Callow. Joseph Peixoto — president of one of
925
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


the condominium corporations, and representative on
the JUC — negotiated the main pricing terms with
Mr. Callow for the renewal of the winter maintenance
contract, which also added a separate summer maintenance
 services contract.

[8] At issue in this appeal is the winter maintenance
agreement, which had a new two-winter term from
November 1, 2012 to April 30, 2014. Pursuant to
clause 9, the corporations were entitled to terminate
the winter maintenance agreement if Callow failed to
give satisfactory service in accordance with the terms
of this Agreement. Moreover, clause 9 provided that
“if for any other reason [Callow’s] services are no
longer required for the whole or part of the property
covered by this Agreement, then the [condominium
 corporations] may terminate this contract upon
giving ten (10) days’ notice in writing to [Callow]”
(A.R., vol. III, at p. 10).

[9] During the first winter of the two-winter
term, there were complaints from occupants of
various condominiums, many of which related to
snow removal from individual parking stalls. In
January 2013, Mr. Callow attended a JUC meeting
 to address the concerns. The minutes reflected
the positive nature of this meeting, recording that
“[t]he Committee confirmed that [Callow] has been
diligent in addressing this issue as best as could
be expected considering the nature of the storms
recently experienced” (A.R., vol. III, at p. 35). After
the meeting, the property manager at the time also
sent a follow-up email to the JUC members: “I know
that your Board has been generally satisfied with the
snow removal — so there is nothing outstanding to
report here” (p. 39).

[10] A few months later — still in the first year of
the agreement — respondent Tammy Zollinger became
 the property manager. About three weeks after
Ms. Zollinger’s arrival, another JUC meeting was
held, this time without Mr. Callow present. During
the meeting, Ms. Zollinger advised the JUC to terminate
 the winter maintenance agreement with Callow
926


“due to poor workmanship in the 2012-13 winter”
(A.R., vol. III, at p. 43). The minutes went on to
indicate that Ms. Zollinger had reviewed the contract
 and advised the JUC members that they could
terminate the contract with Callow with no financial
penalty. Ms. Zollinger further advised that she would
get quotes from other snow removal contractors.
The JUC voted to terminate the winter maintenance
agreement shortly thereafter, “in either March or
April” of 2013 (trial reasons, at para. 51). Baycrest
chose not to inform Mr. Callow of its decision to
terminate the winter maintenance agreement at that
time.

[11] Although only one winter of the two-winter
term had been completed, Callow began discussions
throughout the spring and summer of 2013 with
Baycrest regarding a renewal of the winter maintenance
 agreement. Specifically, Mr. Callow had various
 exchanges with two condominium corporations’
board members, one of whom was Mr. Peixoto.
Following these conversations, wrote the trial judge,
“Mr. Callow thought that he was likely to get a two-
year renewal of his winter maintenance services
contract and they were satisfied with his services”
(para. 41).

[12] Meanwhile, Callow continued to fulfill its
obligations under the winter and summer maintenance
  agreements including, pursuant to the latter
 arrangement, finishing “spring cleanup”, cutting
  grass on a weekly basis and conducting garbage
  pick-up. Furthermore, during the summer of 2013,
  Callow “performed work above and beyond [its]
  summer maintenance services contract” (para. 42),
  even doing what Mr. Callow described as some “freebie
  ” work, which he hoped would act as an incentive
  for Baycrest to renew the winter maintenance agreement
   at the end of the upcoming winter.

[13] Conversations between Callow and
Mr. Peixoto continued into July 2013, at which time
Callow decided to improve the appearance of two
927
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


gardens. In an email dated July 17, 2013, Mr. Peixoto
wrote to another condominium corporation board
member regarding this “freebie” work, writing in
part: “It’s nice he’s doing it but I am sure it’s an
attempt at us keeping him. Btw, I was talking to him
last week as well and he is under the impression
we’re keeping him for winter again. I didn’t say a
word to him cuz I don’t wanna get involved but I did
tell [Ms. Zollinger] that [Mr. Callow] thinks we’re
keeping him for winter” (A.R., vol. III, at p. 73).

[14] Baycrest did not inform Callow about the
decision to terminate the winter maintenance
agreement until September 12, 2013. At that point,
Ms. Zollinger advised Callow by way of email “that
Baycrest will not be requiring your services for the
winter contract for the 2013/2014 season, as per
section 9 of the contract, Baycrest needs to provide
the contractor with 10 days’ notice” (A.R., vol. III,
at p. 49).

[15] Callow consequently filed a statement of claim
for breach of contract, alleging that Baycrest acted in
bad faith by accepting free services while knowing
Callow was offering them in order to maintain their
future contractual relationship. Moreover, Callow
alleged that Baycrest knew or ought to have known
that Callow would not seek other winter maintenance
 contracts in reliance on the representations
that Callow was providing satisfactory service and
the contract would not be prematurely terminated.
Accordingly, “[a]s a result of these misrepresentations
 and/or bad faith conduct, [Mr. Callow on behalf
of Callow] did not bid on other tenders for winter
maintenance contracts. [Baycrest is] now liable for
Callow’s damages for loss of opportunity” (A.R.,
vol. I, p. 45, at para. 30). Finally, Callow alleged that
Baycrest was unjustly enriched by the free services
it provided in the summer of 2013.

[16] Callow sought damages in the amount
of $81,383.68 for breach of contract, an amount
equivalent to the one year remaining on the winter
928


maintenance agreement, damages for intentional
interference with contractual relations, inducing
breach of contract, and negligent misrepresentation.
It also asked for damages in the amount of $5,000.00
for unjust enrichment, an amount equivalent to the
“freebie” work, and pre- and post-judgment interest
and costs on a substantial indemnity basis.

III. Prior Decisions

A. Ontario Superior Court of Justice (O’Bonsawin
   J.), 2017 ONSC 7095

[17] In her review of the circumstances of the dispute
, the trial judge commented on the testimony of
several key witnesses, concluding that Mr. Callow
was a credible witness. In contrast, she found that
Baycrest’s witnesses — including a former property
manager, as well as Ms. Zollinger and Mr. Peixoto —
had “provided many exaggerations, over-statements
and constantly provided comments contrary to the
written evidence” (para. 11). The trial judge thus
preferred Mr. Callow’s version of events to that of
Baycrest.

[18] At trial, Baycrest advanced two main sub-
missions. First, it argued that, as a matter of simple
contractual interpretation, clause 9 clearly and unam-
biguously states that it could terminate the contract
for any reason by providing Callow with 10 days’
notice in writing. Second, even though no cause had
to be shown to invoke clause 9, Baycrest nonetheless
 argued that the evidence before the trial judge
demonstrated that Callow’s level of service did not
comply with the contractual specifications and was
not to its complete satisfaction.

[19] The trial judge dismissed both arguments.
First, she found that Callow’s work met the requi-
site standard. While there were complaints about
Callow’s work, she observed that “a significant
portion related to the clearing of parking stalls,
929
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


which was the fault of owners/tenants who did not
move their vehicles”. “Was the quality of Callow’s
work below standard?” asked the trial judge, “[t]he
evidence leads me”, she wrote, “to answer no”
(para. 55).

[20] Second, the trial judge held that this was not
a simple contractual interpretation case. In her view,
the organizing principle of good faith performance
and the duty of honest performance were engaged.
The trial judge explained that, as Cromwell J. noted
in Bhasin, the duty of honest performance should not
be confused with a duty of disclosure. “However,”
she wrote, “contracting parties must be able to rely
on a minimum standard of honesty” to ensure “that
parties will have a fair opportunity to protect their
interests if the contract does not work out” (para. 60,
citing Bhasin, at para. 86). For the purposes of drawing
 a distinction between the failure to disclose a
material fact and active dishonesty, the trial judge
observed that “[u]nless there is active deception,
there is no unilateral duty to disclose information
before the notice period” (para. 61).

[21] The trial judge was satisfied that Baycrest
“actively deceived” Callow from the time the termination
  decision was made in March or April 2013 to the
 time when notice was given on September 12, 2013.
 Specifically, she found that Baycrest “acted in bad
 faith by (1) withholding the information to ensure
 Callow performed the summer maintenance services
 contract; and (2) continuing to represent that the contract
  was not in danger despite [Baycrest’s] knowledge
  that Callow was taking on extra tasks to bolster
 the chances of renewing the winter maintenance
 services contract” (para. 65). Given the active communications
  between the parties during the summer
 of 2013, “which deceived Callow”, the trial judge
 “[did] not accept [Baycrest’s] argument that no duty
 was owed to disclose the decision to terminate the
 contract before the notice” (para. 66). “The minimum
930


standard of honesty”, she concluded, “would have
been to address the alleged performance issues, to
provide prompt notice, or to refrain from any representations
 in anticipation of the notice period”
(para. 67).

[22] The trial judge tied Baycrest’s dishonesty to
the way in which it delayed invocation of the 10-
day notice period set out in clause 9, while it actively
 deceived Callow that the contract was not in
jeopardy. Her reasons relied upon, by analogy, the
law recognizing a duty to exercise good faith in the
manner of dismissal when terminating an employee.
She noted that Baycrest “intentionally withheld the
information in bad faith” (para. 69). She expressly
acknowledged that exercising a termination clause
is not, in itself, evidence of a breach of good faith.
However, in this case, Baycrest deliberately deceived
Callow about termination, which was a breach of the
duty of honest performance.

[23] By reason of this contractual breach, the trial
judge awarded damages to Callow, in order to place
it in the same position as if the breach had not occurred
. These damages amounted to $64,306.96, a
sum equivalent to the value of the winter maintenance
 agreement for one year, minus expenses that
Callow would typically incur; a further amount of
$14,835.14, representing the value of one year of
a lease of equipment that Callow would not have
leased if it had known the winter maintenance was
to be terminated; and $1,600.00 for the final invoice
for the summer work, which Baycrest had failed to
pay to Callow. Costs were awarded to Callow.

[24] The trial judge was also satisfied that Baycrest
was unjustly enriched due to the “freebie” work performed
 by Callow during the summer of 2013. She
declined, however, to award damages for the unjust
931
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


enrichment since Callow failed to provide evidence
of its expenses.

B. Court of Appeal for Ontario (Lauwers, Huscroft
   and Trotter JJ.A.), 2018 ONCA 896, 429 D.L.R.
   (4th) 704

[25] Baycrest appealed, arguing that the trial judge
erred in two respects. First, it alleged she erred by
improperly expanding the duty of honest performance
 beyond the terms of the winter maintenance
agreement. Second, it argued the trial judge erred in
assessing damages.

[26] The Court of Appeal unanimously agreed with
Baycrest on the first point, and set aside the judgment
at first instance. The Court of Appeal recognized, as
the trial judge had found, that the “[d]irectors of two
of the condominium corporations and members of
the JUC were aware that Mr. Callow was performing
‘freebie’ work, and knew he was under the impression
 that the contracts were likely to be renewed”
(para. 5). Nonetheless, the court stressed that Bhasin
was a modest, incremental step, and good faith is to
be applied in a manner so as to avoid commercial
uncertainty. As such, the duty of honesty “does not
impose a duty of loyalty or of disclosure or to require
a party to forego advantages flowing from the contract
” (para. 12, citing Bhasin, at para. 73).

[27] The Court of Appeal further emphasized that
Callow had made two concessions in its factum.
First, Callow acknowledged that Baycrest was not
contractually required to disclose its decision to terminate
 the winter maintenance agreement prior to
the 10-day notice period. Second, Callow acknowledged
 that the failure to provide notice on a more
timely basis was not, in and of itself, evidence of
bad faith. Because there is “no unilateral duty to
disclose information relevant to termination”, the
932


court reasoned Baycrest “[was] free to terminate the
winter contract with [Callow] provided only that [it]
informed him of [its] intention to do so and gave the
required notice. That is all that [Callow] bargained
for, and all that he was entitled to” (para. 17). While
the trial judge’s findings “may well suggest a failure
to act honourably,” the Court of Appeal expressed its
view that the findings “do not rise to the high level
required to establish a breach of the duty of honest
performance” (para. 16).

[28] In any event, the Court of Appeal said that any
deception in the communications during the summer
of 2013 related to a new contract not yet in existence,
namely the renewal that Callow hoped to negotiate.
Accordingly, in its view, any deception could not be
said to be directly linked to the performance of the
winter contract (para. 18).

[29] Given the Court of Appeal’s conclusion, it did
not address damages.

IV. Analysis

A. Overview of the Appeal

[30] This appeal presents this Court with an opportunity
 to clarify what constitutes a breach of the
duty of honest performance where it manifests itself
in connection with the exercise of a seemingly unfettered
, unilateral termination clause. Pointing to what
it calls Baycrest’s active deception in the exercise of
the clause, Callow says this conduct was a breach
of the duty of honest performance recognized in
Bhasin.

[31] Before this Court, Callow does not dispute
the meaning of clause 9. Nor does Callow’s argument
 on appeal concern the adequacy of the bargain
struck with Baycrest or whether the termination was
unjustified. Callow is not saying, for instance, that
it should have been afforded more notice because
933
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


the 10-day period was unfair in the circumstances. I
recognize that, at trial, there was some question as to
whether the termination was fitting given Callow’s
work record. Indeed, the trial judge found in Callow’s
favour on this point, concluding that it had provided
satisfactory services. But the suggestions that Callow
was terminated for some improper purpose or motive
, or even that the termination was unreasonable,
need not be determined on this appeal. The narrow
question addressed here is whether Baycrest failed
to satisfy its duty not to lie or knowingly deceive
Callow about matters directly linked to the performance
 of the winter maintenance agreement, specifically
 by exercising the termination clause as it did.

[32] In the present circumstances, Callow says
Baycrest misled Mr. Callow about the possible renewal
 of the winter maintenance agreement and, as a
result, it knowingly deceived him into thinking it was
satisfied with Callow’s performance of the agreement
then in force for the upcoming winter season. Callow
says it mistakenly inferred, as a consequence of this
dishonesty, that there was no danger of the existing
winter contract being terminated pursuant to clause 9
of the contract. This, Callow submits, was to the full
knowledge of Baycrest, who failed to correct its false
impression which amounted to a breach of the duty
of honest performance. In short, Callow says this
deceitful conduct meant the exercise of the termination
 clause was wrongful in that it was breached even
if, strictly speaking, the required notice was given.
This should give rise, claims Callow, to compensa-
tory damages on the ordinary measure as the trial
judge had ordered: damages for lost profits, wasted
expenditures and an unpaid invoice.

[33] In addition to the duty of honest performance,
Callow invokes a free-standing duty to exercise
934


contractual discretionary powers in good faith,
which, it argues, Cromwell J. also recognized in
Bhasin and which would justify the same award in
damages. Furthermore, in the event the Court disa-
grees that there has been a breach of one or another of
those existing duties, Callow submits, alternatively,
that this Court should recognize a new duty of good
faith, which would prohibit “active non-disclosure”.

[34] In answer, Baycrest notes the concessions
made by Callow before the Court of Appeal, specifically
 that clause 9 on its face did not require it to
give more notice. Baycrest agrees with the Court of
Appeal that whatever communications took place
between the parties, those communications concerned
  a future contract and were not directly related
 to the performance of the winter contract then in
 force. The agreement granted Baycrest an unquali-
 fied right to terminate the contract on notice for any
 reason, which is precisely what occurred. Recalling
 that the duty to act honestly in performance is not
 a duty of disclosure and does not impose a duty of
 loyalty akin to that of a fiduciary, Baycrest says that
 Callow seeks to have it subvert its own interest by
 requiring it to inform Callow of its intention to end
 the winter maintenance agreement before the stipulated
  10 days’ notice. The Court of Appeal was thus
 correct in concluding that the bargain struck by the
 parties entitled Baycrest to end the contract as it did.
 In a similar vein, with respect to the duty to exercise
 discretionary powers in good faith, Baycrest says
 that because it respected the terms of the contract,
 the issue of abuse of contractual discretion does not
 arise on the facts of this case.

[35] In any event, Baycrest emphasizes the conclusion
 reached by the Court of Appeal that any discussions
 in the spring and summer of 2013 that may have
misled Callow were connected to pre-contractual
935
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


negotiations. Thus, any dishonesty cannot be said to
be directly linked to the performance of the winter
maintenance agreement.

[36] The appeal should be allowed. I respectfully
disagree with the Court of Appeal on two main
points.

[37] First, Bhasin is clear that even though Baycrest
had what was, on its face, an unfettered right to terminate
 the winter maintenance agreement on 10 days’
notice, the right had to be exercised in keeping with
the duty to act honestly, i.e. Baycrest could not “lie
or otherwise knowingly mislead” Callow “about
matters directly linked to the performance of the
contract”. According to the Court of Appeal, any
dishonesty was about a renewal, which was in turn
connected to pre-contractual negotiations to which
the duty as stated in Bhasin does not apply. I respectfully
 disagree. In my view, the Court of Appeal may
have erroneously framed the trial judge’s findings
at para. 6, writing that she found that Baycrest had
represented “that the winter contract was not in danger
 of non-renewal” (emphasis added). Referring
instead to the ongoing winter services agreement, the
trial judge had found Baycrest misrepresented “that
the contract was not in danger despite [Baycrest’s]
knowledge that Callow was taking on extra tasks to
bolster the chances of renewing the winter maintenance
 services contract” (para. 65). In determining
whether dishonesty is connected to a given contract,
the relevant question is generally whether a right
under that contract was exercised, or an obligation
under that contract was performed, dishonestly. As
I understand it, the trial judge’s finding was that the
dishonesty in this case was related not to a future
contract but to the termination of the winter maintenance
 agreement. If someone is led to believe that
their counterparty is content with their work and their
ongoing contract is likely to be renewed, it is reasonable
 for that person to infer that the ongoing contract
 is in good standing and will not be terminated
early. This is what the trial judge found. Simply said,
Baycrest’s alleged deception was directly linked to
936


this contract because its exercise of the termination
clause in this contract was dishonest.

[38] Second, the Court of Appeal erred when it concluded
 that the trial judge’s findings did not amount
to a breach of the duty of honest performance. While
the duty of honest performance is not to be equated
with a positive obligation of disclosure, this too does
not exhaust the question as to whether Baycrest’s
conduct constituted, as a breach of the duty of honesty
, a wrongful exercise of the termination clause.
Baycrest may not have had a free-standing obligation
to disclose its intention to terminate the contract before
 the mandated 10 days’ notice, but it nonetheless
had an obligation to refrain from misleading Callow
in the exercise of that clause. In circumstances where
a party lies to or knowingly misleads another, a lack
of a positive obligation of disclosure does not preclude
 an obligation to correct the false impression
created through its own actions.

[39] In light of these points, it is my view that this
is not a simple contractual interpretation case bearing
on the meaning to be given to clause 9. Nor is this a
case involving passive failure to disclose a material
fact. Instead, as recognized by the Court of Appeal,
“[n]ot only did [Baycrest] fail to inform [Callow] of
[its] decision to terminate, . . . [it] actively deceived
Callow as to [its] intentions and accepted the ‘freebie
’ work [it] performed, in the knowledge that this
extra work was performed with the intention/hope
of persuading [Baycrest] to award [Callow] additional
 contracts once the present contracts expired”
(para. 15 (emphasis added)). While Baycrest was
not required to subvert its legitimate contractual
interests to those of Callow in respect of the existing
937
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


winter services agreement, it could not, as it did,
“undermine those interests in bad faith” (Bhasin, at
para. 65).

[40] For the reasons that follow, this dispute can
be resolved on the basis of the first ground of appeal
relating to the duty of honest performance. Baycrest
knowingly misled Callow in the manner in which it
exercised clause 9 of the agreement and this wrongful
 exercise of the termination clause amounts to
a breach of contract under Bhasin. In the circumstances
, I find it unnecessary to answer Callow’s argument
 that, irrespective of the question of honesty,
Baycrest breached a duty to exercise a discretionary
power in good faith. Nor is it necessary to extend
Bhasin to recognize a new duty of good faith relating
to what Callow has described as “active non-disclosure
” of information germane to performance.

B. The Duty of Honest Performance

  (1) The Dishonesty Is Directly Linked to the
      Performance of the Contract

[41] I turn first to Callow’s submission that the
Court of Appeal erred in concluding that the dishonesty
 was not connected to the contract “then in effect
” (C.A. reasons, at para. 18). As I will endeavour
to explain, while Baycrest had the right to terminate,
it breached the duty of honest performance in exercising
 the right as it did.

[42] Callow relies on the duty of honest performance
 in contract formulated in Bhasin. This duty,
which applies to all contracts, “requires the parties
to be honest with each other in relation to the performance
 of their contractual obligations” (para. 93).
While this formulation of the duty refers explicitly
 to the performance of contractual obligations, it
938


applies, of course, both to the performance of one’s
obligations and to the exercise of one’s rights under
the contract. Cromwell J. concluded, at paras. 94
and 103, that the finding that the non-renewal clause
had been exercised dishonestly made out a breach
of the duty:

    The trial judge made a clear finding of fact that
Can-Am “acted dishonestly toward Bhasin in exercising
the non-renewal clause”: para. 261; see also para. 271.
There is no basis to interfere with that finding on appeal.
It follows that Can-Am breached its duty to perform the
Agreement honestly.

                            ...

    As the trial judge found, this dishonesty on the part
of Can-Am was directly and intimately connected to
Can-Am’s performance of the Agreement with Mr. Bhasin
 and its exercise of the non-renewal provision. I conclude
 that Can-Am breached the 1998 Agreement when it failed
 to act honestly with Mr. Bhasin in exercising the non-renewal
  clause. [Emphasis added.]

This same framework for analysis applies to this
appeal. The trial judge here made a clear finding of
fact that Baycrest acted dishonestly toward Callow
by representing that the contract was not in danger
even though a decision to terminate the contract had
already been made (paras. 65 and 67). There is no
basis to interfere with that finding on appeal. As I
will explain, it follows that Baycrest deceived Callow
and thereby breached its duty of honest performance.

[43] I begin by recognizing the debate as to the
extent to which good faith, beyond the duty of honesty
, should substantively constrain a right to terminate
, in particular one found in a contract (see,
e.g., W. Courtney, “Good Faith and Termination:
The English and Australian Experience” (2019),
1 Journal of Commonwealth Law 185, at p. 189;
M. Bridge, “The Exercise of Contractual Discretion”
(2019), 135 L.Q.R. 227, at p. 247). For some, the
right to terminate is in the nature of an “absolute
939
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


right” insulated from judicial oversight, unlike the
exercise of contractual discretion (see E. Peel, The
Law of Contract (15th ed. 2020), at para. 18-088).
To this end, I recall that Cromwell J. observed that
“[c]lassifying the decision not to renew the contract
 as a contractual discretion would constitute
a significant expansion of the decided cases under
that type of situation” (Bhasin, at para. 72). I need
not and do not seek to resolve this debate in this
case. I emphasize that Cromwell J. himself recognized
 that, regardless of this debate, the non-renewal
clause could not be exercised dishonestly (para. 94).
Whatever the full range of circumstances to which
good faith is relevant to contract law in common law
Canada, it is beyond question that the duty of honesty
is germane to the performance of this contract, in
particular to the way in which the unilateral right to
terminate for convenience set forth in clause 9 was
exercised.

[44] As a further preliminary matter, I recall that
the organizing principle of good faith recognized by
Cromwell J. is not a free-standing rule, but instead
manifests itself through existing good faith doctrines,
and that this list may be incrementally expanded
where appropriate. In this case, Callow invokes two
existing doctrines: the duty of honest performance
and the duty to exercise discretionary powers in good
faith. In my view, properly understood, the duty
to act honestly about matters directly linked to the
performance of the contract — the exercise of the
termination clause — is sufficient to dispose of this
appeal. No expansion of the law set forth in Bhasin is
necessary to find in favour of Callow. Rather, this appeal
 provides an opportunity to illustrate this existing
doctrine that, I say respectfully, was misconstrued by
the Court of Appeal.

[45] While these two existing doctrines are indeed
distinct, like each of the different manifestations of
the organizing principle, they should not be thought
of as disconnected from one another. Cromwell J.
940


explained that good faith contractual performance is
a shared “requirement of justice” that underpins and
informs the various rules recognized by the common
law on obligations of good faith contractual performance
 (Bhasin, at para. 64). The organizing principle
of good faith was intended to correct the “piecemeal”
approach to good faith in the common law, which
too often failed to take a consistent or principled
approach to similar problems and, instead, develop
the law in this area in a “coherent and principled
way” (paras. 59 and 64).

[46] By insisting upon the thread that ties the good
faith doctrines together — expressed through the
organizing principle — courts will put an end to
the very piecemeal and incoherent development of
good faith doctrine in the common law against which
Cromwell J. sought to guard. While the duty of honest
 performance might bear some resemblance to the
law of misrepresentation, for example, in a way that
good faith in other settings may not, Bhasin encour-
ages us to examine how other existing good faith
doctrines, distinct but nonetheless connected, can
be used as helpful analytical tools in understanding
how the relatively new duty of honest performance
operates in practice.

[47] The specific legal doctrines derived from
the organizing principle rest on a “requirement of
justice” that a contracting party, like Baycrest here
in respect of the contractual duty of honest performance
, have appropriate regard to the legitimate
contractual interests of their counterparty (Bhasin, at
paras. 63-64). It need not, according to Bhasin, subvert
 its own interests to those of Callow by acting as
a fiduciary or in a selfless manner that would confer
a benefit on Callow. To be sure, this requirement of
justice reflects the notion that the bargain, the rights
and obligations agreed to, is the first source of fairness
 between parties to a contract. But by the same
token, those rights and obligations must be exercised
and performed, as stated by the organizing principle,
honestly and reasonably and not capriciously or arbitrarily
 where recognized by law. This requirement
of justice, rooted in a contractual ideal of corrective
941
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


justice, ties the existing doctrines of good faith, including
 the duty to act honestly, together. The duty of
honest performance is but an exemplification of this
ideal. Here, based on its failure to perform clause 9
honestly, Baycrest committed a breach of contract,
a civil wrong, for which it has to answer.

[48] When, in Bhasin, Cromwell J. recognized
a duty to act honestly in the performance of contracts
, he explained that this duty “should not be
thought of as an implied term, but a general doctrine
of contract law that imposes as a contractual duty
a minimum standard of honest contractual performance
” (para. 74). Characterizing this new duty as
a matter of contractual doctrine was appropriate,
Cromwell J. wrote, “since parties will rarely expect
that their contracts permit dishonest performance of
their obligations” (para. 76). The duty therefore applies
 even where — as in our case — the parties have
expressly provided for the modalities of termination
given that the duty of good faith “operates irrespective
 of the intentions of the parties” (para. 74). No
contractual right, including a termination right, can
be exercised dishonestly and, as such, contrary to the
requirements of good faith.

[49] Cromwell J.’s choice of language is telling. It
is not enough to say that, temporally speaking, dishonesty
 occurred while both parties were performing
their obligations under the contract; rather, the dishonest
 or misleading conduct must be directly linked
to performance. Otherwise, there would simply be a
duty not to tell a lie, with little to limit the potentially
wide scope of liability.

[50] The duty of honest performance is a contract
 law doctrine, setting it apart from other areas
of the law that address the legal consequences of
deceit with which it may share certain similarities.
942


One could imagine analyzing the facts giving rise
to a duty of honest performance claim through
the lens of other existing legal doctrines, such as
fraudulent misrepresentation giving rise to rescis-
sion of the contract or the tort of civil fraud (see,
e.g., B. MacDougall, Misrepresentation (2016), at
§§ 1.144-1.145). However, in Bhasin, Cromwell J.
wrote explicitly that while the duty of honest performance
 has similarities with civil fraud and estoppel
 “it is not subsumed by them” (para. 88). For
instance, unlike estoppel and civil fraud, the duty of
honest performance does not require a defendant to
intend that the plaintiff rely on their representation
or false statement. Cromwell J. explicitly defined the
duty as a new and distinct doctrine of contract law,
not giving rise to tort liability or tort damages but
rather resulting in a breach of contract when violated
(paras. 72-74, 90, 93 and 103). We are not asked by
 the parties to depart from this approach.

[51] In light of Bhasin, then, how is the duty of honest
 performance appropriately limited? The breach
must be directly linked to the performance of the
contract. Cromwell J. observed a contractual breach
because Can-Am “acted dishonestly toward Bhasin
in exercising the non-renewal clause” (para. 94). He
pointed, in particular, to the trial judge’s conclusion
that Can-Am “acted dishonestly with Mr. Bhasin
throughout the period leading up to its exercise of the
non-renewal clause” (para. 98; see also para. 103).
Accordingly, it is a link to the performance of obligations
 under a contract, or to the exercise of rights
set forth therein, that controls the scope of the duty.
In a comment on Bhasin, Professor McCamus underscored
 this connection: “Cromwell J was of the view
that the new duty of honesty could be breached in
the context of the exercise of a right of non-renewal.
That was the holding in Bhasin” (“The New General
‘Principle’ of Good Faith Performance and the New
‘Rule’ of Honesty in Performance in Canadian
Contract Law” (2015), 32 J.C.L. 103, at p. 115).
943
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


While the abuse of discretion was not the basis of
the damages awarded in Bhasin, the duty of honest
performance shares a common methodology with
the duty to exercise contractual discretionary powers
 in good faith by fixing, at least in circumstances
like ours, on the wrongful exercise of a contractual
prerogative.

[52] Importantly, Callow does not seek to bar
Baycrest from exercising the termination clause here;
like in Bhasin, it only seeks damages flowing from
the fact that the clause was exercised dishonestly. In
other words, Callow’s argument, properly framed, is
that Baycrest could not exercise clause 9 in a manner
that breached the duty of honesty, however absolute
that right appeared on its face.

[53] Good faith is thus not relied upon here to
provide, by implication, a new contractual term or a
guide to interpretation of language that was somehow
 an unclear statement of parties’ intent. Instead,
the duty of honesty as contractual doctrine has a
limiting function on the exercise of an otherwise
complete and clear right because the duty, irrespective
 of the intention of the parties, applies to the
performance of all contracts and, by extension, to
all contractual obligations and rights. This means,
simply, that instead of constraining the decision to
terminate in and of itself, the duty of honest performance
 attracts damages where the manner in which
the right was exercised was dishonest.

[54] The issue, then, is not whether the clause was
properly interpreted, or whether the bargain itself is
inadequate. Moreover, what is important is not the
failure to act honestly in the abstract but whether
Baycrest failed to act honestly in exercising clause 9.
944


Stated simply, no contractual right can be exercised
in a dishonest manner because, pursuant to Bhasin,
that would be contrary to an imperative requirement
of good faith, i.e. not to lie or knowingly deceive
one’s counterparty in a matter directly linked to the
performance of the contract.

[55] This argument invites this Court to explain if
and how Baycrest wrongfully exercised the termination
 clause, quite apart from any notice requirement
. I would add that this focus on the manner in
which the termination right was exercised should
not be confused with whether the right could be
exercised. Callow does not allege that Baycrest did
not have the right to terminate the agreement — this
entitlement to do so on 10 days’ notice, pursuant
to clause 9, is not at issue here. However, according
 to Callow, that right was exercised dishonestly,
in breach of the duty in Bhasin, obliging Baycrest
to pay damages as a consequence of its behaviour.
Accordingly, I would draw the same distinction made
by Cromwell J. in Bhasin regarding the exercise of
the non-renewal clause at issue in that case: Can-Am
acted dishonestly towards Mr. Bhasin in exercising
the non-renewal clause as it did, and was liable for
damages as a result, but it was not precluded from
exercising its prerogative not to renew the contract.

[56] In service of its argument that Baycrest
breached the duty of honest performance in its exercise
 of clause 9 of the contract, Callow points to
references in Bhasin to Quebec law (at paras. 32, 35,
41, 44, 82 and 85) and in particular to Cromwell J.’s
reference to the theory of the abuse of contractual
rights set forth in arts. 6, 7 and 1375 of the Civil Code
of Québec (“C.C.Q.” or “Civil Code”) (para. 83).
Callow observes that the requirement not to abuse
contractual rights is recognized as a feature of good
945
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


faith performance in Quebec. It submits that the allu-
sion to the doctrine of abuse of rights was an indication
 of the requirements of good faith in Bhasin and
argues that the same framework can usefully illustrate
 how the common law duty of honesty constrains
the termination clause in this case.

[57] I agree that looking to Quebec law is useful
here. The direct link between the dishonest conduct
and the exercise of clause 9 was not properly identified
 by the Court of Appeal in this case and Quebec
law helps illustrate the requirement that there be such
a link from Bhasin. In my view, Baycrest’s dishonest
conduct is not a wrong independent of the termination
clause but a breach of contract that, properly understood
, manifested itself upon the exercise of clause 9.
Through that direct link between the dishonesty and
the exercise of the clause, the conduct is understood
as contrary to the requirements of good faith. This
emerges more plainly when considered in light of the
civilian doctrine of contractual good faith alluded to
in Bhasin, specifically the fact that, in Quebec “[t]he
notion of good faith includes (but is not limited to)
the requirement of honesty in performing the contract
” (para. 83). Thus, like in Quebec civil law, no
contractual right may be exercised dishonestly and
therefore contrary to the requirements of good faith.
Properly raised by Cromwell J., this framework for
connecting the exercise of a contractual clause and
the requirements of good faith is helpful to illustrate,
for the common law, the link made in Bhasin that the
Court of Appeal failed to identify here.

[58] Mindful no doubt of its unique vantage point
which offers an occasion to observe developments in
both the common law and the civil law in its work,
this Court has often drawn on this country’s bijural
environment to inform its decisions, principally in
946


private law appeals. While this practice has varied
over time and has been most prevalent in civil law
cases in which common law authorities are considered
, the influence of bijuralism is not and need not
be confined to appeals from Quebec or to matters
relating to federal legislation (see J.-F. Gaudreault-
DesBiens, Les solitudes du bijuridisme au Canada
(2007), at pp. 7-22). In its modern jurisprudence,
this Court has recognized the value of looking to
legal sources from Quebec in common law appeals,
and has often observed how these sources resolve
similar legal issues to those faced by the common
law (see, e.g., Canadian National Railway Co. v.
Norsk Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021,
at pp. 1143-44; Deloitte & Touche v. Livent Inc.
(Receiver of), 2017 SCC 63, [2017] 2 S.C.R. 855,
at para. 138; see also Kingstreet Investments Ltd. v.
New Brunswick (Finance), 2007 SCC 1, [2007] 1
S.C.R. 3, at para. 41). Used in this way, authorities
from Quebec do not, of course, bind this Court in its
disposition of a private law appeal from a common
law province, but rather serve as persuasive authority,
in particular, by shedding light on how the juris-
dictionally applicable rules work. In my respectful
view, it is uncontroversial that, when done carefully,
sources of law may be used in this way (Farber v.
Royal Trust Co., [1997] 1 S.C.R. 846, at para. 32,
citing J.-L. Baudouin, “L’interprétation du Code civil
québécois par la Cour suprême du Canada” (1975),
53 Can. Bar Rev. 715, at p. 726). As Robert J. Sharpe
put it, writing extra-judicially, judges “should strive
to maintain the coherence and integrity of the law as
defined by the binding authorities, using persuasive
authority to elaborate and flesh out its basic structure
” (Good Judgment: Making Judicial Decisions
(2018), at pp. 171-72).

[59] This does not mean the appropriate use of
these sources is limited to cases where there is a gap
in the law of the jurisdiction in which the appeal
947
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


originates, in the sense that there is no answer to the
legal problem in that law, or where a court contemplates
 modifying an existing rule. Respectfully said,
I am aware of no authority of this Court supporting
so restrictive an approach and note that, while unre-
solved, there are serious debates in both the common
law and the civil law as to what exactly a “gap” in
the law might be (see, e.g., J. Gardner, “Concerning
Permissive Sources and Gaps” (1988), 8 Oxford
J. Leg. Stud. 457; J. E. C. Brierley, “Quebec’s
‘Common Laws’ (Droits Communs): How Many
Are There?”, in E. Caparros et al., eds., Mélanges
Louis-Philippe Pigeon (1989), 109). Taking this approach
 would unduly inhibit the ability of this Court
to understand the law better in reference to how comparable
 problems are addressed elsewhere in Canada.
It would be wrong to disregard potentially helpful
material in this way merely because of its origin.

[60] In private law, comparison between the common
 law and civil law as they evolve in Canada is
a particularly useful and familiar exercise for this
Court. This exercise of comparison between legal
traditions for the purposes of “explanation” and
“illustration” has been described as “worthwhile”,
“useful” and “helpful” (Farber, at paras. 32 and 35;
St. Lawrence Cement Inc. v. Barrette, 2008 SCC 64,
[2008] 3 S.C.R. 392, at para. 76; Norsk, at p. 1174,
per Stevenson J. (concurring)). Principles from the
common law or the civil law may serve as a “source
of inspiration” for the other, precisely because these
“two legal communities have the same broad social
values” (Bou Malhab v. Diffusion Métromédia CMR
inc., 2011 SCC 9, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 214, at para. 38).
The common law and the civil law are not the only
legal traditions relevant to the work of the Court;
yet, the opportunity for dialogue between these legal
traditions is arguably a special mandate for this Court
given the breadth and responsibilities of its bijural
jurisdiction. This opportunity has been underscored
 in scholarly commentary, including in the field of
 good faith performance of contracts (e.g., L. LeBel
 and P.-L. Le Saunier, “L’interaction du droit civil et
948


de la common law à la Cour suprême du Canada”
(2006), 47 C. de D. 179, at p. 206; R. Jukier, “Good
Faith in Contract: A Judicial Dialogue Between
Common Law Canada and Québec” (2019), 1
Journal of Commonwealth Law 83).

[61] Writing extra-judicially, LeBel J. has observed
that this exercise is part of the function of this Court,
as a national appellate court, adding that [translation
] “because it has the ability to do so today,
thanks to its institutional resources, the Supreme
Court now assumes the symbolic responsibility of
embracing a culture of dialogue between the two
major legal traditions” (“Les cultures de la Cour
suprême du Canada: vers l’émergence d’une culture
 dialogique?”, in J.-F. Gaudreault-DesBiens et
al., eds., Convergence, concurrence et harmonisation
 des systèmes juridiques (2009), 1, at p. 7). This
Court’s unique institutional capacity as the apex
court of common law and civil law appeals in Canada
allows it to engage in dialogue that makes it “more
than a court of appeal for each of the provinces”
(F. Allard, The Supreme Court of Canada and its
Impact on the Expression of Bijuralism (2001), at
p. 21). The opportunity for dialogue presents itself
specifically in the context of the common law good
faith doctrines. Pointing to the writing of LeBel J.
and to how Quebec sources were deployed in Bhasin,
one comparative law scholar wrote recently that
while the distinctiveness of Canada’s legal traditions
 must be “maintained and jealously protected,
[this] need not prevent [them] from learning from
[one another]” (R. Jukier, “The Legacy of Justice
Louis LeBel: The Civilian Tradition and Procedural
Law” (2015), 70 S.C.L.R. (2d) 27, at p. 45). Professor
Waddams has remarked that the reference to Quebec
law in Bhasin is an “invitation” to consider civil law
concepts, including abuse of rights, in the development
 of the common law relating to good faith
(see “Unfairness and Good Faith in Contract Law:
A New Approach” (2017), 80 S.C.L.R. (2d) 309, at
pp. 330-31). This would be consistent with a broader
pattern of “more pronounced reciprocal influence
between traditions as comparative analysis becomes
949
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


increasingly prominent in [this Court’s] judgments”
(Allard, at p. 22).

[62] Indeed, this Court has undertaken this exercise
in some common law and civil law appeals in which
good faith principles are engaged, including Bhasin
itself (see also Potter v. New Brunswick Legal Aid
Services Commission, 2015 SCC 10, [2015] 1 S.C.R.
500, at para. 30; Wallace v. United Grain Growers
Ltd., [1997] 3 S.C.R. 701, at paras. 75 and 96, citing
Farber). Cromwell J. pointed to the comfort that
can be drawn from the experience of the civil law of
Quebec, for example, by those common lawyers who
fear that a new duty of honest performance would
“create uncertainty or impede freedom of contract”
(Bhasin, at para. 82). Cromwell J. also pointed to
substantive points of comparison in support of his
analysis on the similarity between implied terms
in the common law and good faith in Quebec as
well as on the fact that good faith in Quebec law
also includes a requirement of honesty in performing
 contracts (paras. 44 and 83). Strikingly, in one
recent Quebec example that is especially relevant
here, Gascon J., writing for a majority of this Court,
quoted Bhasin on the degree to which the organizing
 principle of good faith exemplifies the notion
that a contracting party should have “appropriate
regard” to the legitimate contractual interests of their
counterparty. He noted that “[t]his statement applies
equally to the duty of good faith in Quebec civil law”
(Churchill Falls (Labrador) Corp. v. Hydro-Québec,
2018 SCC 46, [2018] 3 S.C.R. 101, at para. 117).
I note this only as an instance of accepted judicial
reasoning in this field, where comparisons are rightly
said to be difficult. A majority of the Court nevertheless
 invoked a leading common law authority
on good faith to illuminate the civil law’s distinct
treatment as both helpful and persuasive.
950


[63] In the same way, I draw on Quebec civil law in
this appeal to illustrate what it means for dishonesty
to be directly linked to contractual performance.
As I will explain, the civil law framework of abuse
of rights helps to focus the analysis of whether the
common law duty of honest performance has been
breached on what might be called the wrongful exercise
 of a contractual right.

[64] This appeal makes plain a need for clarification
 on the question of when dishonesty is directly
linked to the performance of a contract. The Court of
Appeal recognized the duty of honest performance,
but concluded that the communications at issue were
not directly linked to performance of the existing
contract: “Communications between the parties may
have led Mr. Callow to believe that there would be
a new contract, but those communications did not
preclude [Baycrest] from exercising their right to terminate
 the winter contract then in effect” (para. 18).
The Court’s reasons also conclude that Baycrest
could exercise the termination clause “provided only
that [it] informed him of [its] intention to do so and
gave the required notice. That is all [Callow] bargained
 for, and all that [it] was entitled to” (para. 17).
The Court of Appeal apparently did not consider
that the manner in which the termination right was
exercised amounted to a breach of the duty to act
honestly. This was, for the trial judge in the present
appeal, the matter directly linked to the performance
of the contract in the dispute with Callow.

[65] These diverging conclusions in this case are
unsurprising given that this Court recognized the
duty of honest performance as a “new” good faith
doctrine relatively recently (Bhasin, at para. 93).
Nevertheless, the reasons in Bhasin indicate how
the required connection between the dishonesty and
performance is made manifest. When Cromwell J.
summarized the new duty, he suggested that it required
 honesty “about matters directly linked to the
performance of the contract” and, later, “in relation
951
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


to the performance of their contractual obligations”
(paras. 73 and 93). But this latter formulation does
not of course comprehensively describe the required
link, not least of all because it speaks of honesty in
the performance of an obligation, and says nothing
about the exercise of a right. Yet, in applying the
duty to the facts in Bhasin, this Court concluded that
there was a breach of the duty on the basis of the
trial judge’s finding that Can-Am acted dishonestly
in the exercise of the non-renewal clause (paras. 94
and 103).

[66] Further, I note that while the duty of honest
performance has similarities with the pre-existing
common law doctrines of civil fraud and estoppel,
these doctrines do not assist in our analysis of the
required link to the performance of the contract. The
duty of honest performance is a contract law doctrine
(Bhasin, at para. 74). It is not a tort. It is its nature as
a contract law doctrine that gives rise to the requirement
 of a nexus with the contractual relationship.
While other areas of the law involving dishonesty
may be useful to understand what it means to be
dishonest, they provide no obvious assistance in
determining what is and is not directly linked to the
performance of a contract.

[67] In my view, the required direct link between
dishonesty and performance from Bhasin is made
plain, by way of simple comparison, when one
considers how the framework for abuse of rights in
Quebec connects the manner in which a contractual
right is exercised to the requirements of good faith.
Specifically, the direct link exists when the party
performs their obligation or exercises their right
under the contract dishonestly. When read together,
arts. 6, 7 and 1375 C.C.Q. point to this connection by
providing that no contractual right may be exercised
abusively without violating the requirements of good
faith. Article 7 in particular provides “[n]o right may
be exercised with the intent of injuring another or in
an excessive and unreasonable manner, and therefore
952


contrary to the requirements of good faith.” While the
substantive content of this article is not relevant to
the common law analysis, the framework is illustrative
. This article shows how the requirements of good
faith can be tied to the exercise of a right, including
a right under a contract. It is the exercise of the right
that is scrutinized to assess whether the action has
been contrary to good faith.

[68] Under the civil law framework of abuse of
rights, it is no answer to say that, because a right is
unfettered on its face, it is insulated from review as
to the manner in which it was exercised. Moreover,
the doctrine of abuse of right does not preclude the
holder from exercising the contractual right in question
. As Professors Jobin and Vézina have written
on abuse of contractual rights in Quebec, [translation
] “[t]he doctrine of abuse of right does not
lead to the negation of the right as such; rather, it
addresses the use made of the right by its holder”
(J.-L. Baudouin and P.-G. Jobin, Les obligations (7th
ed. 2013), by P.-G. Jobin and N. Vézina, at No. 156).
It has been said that good faith in the civil law has
a [translation] “limiting function” in directing
standards of ethical conduct to which parties must
conform, as a matter of imperative law, when performing
 the contract: [translation] “It [i.e. the
limiting function of good faith] thus seeks to sanction
a party’s improper conduct in the exercise of the
party’s contractual prerogatives.” (M. A. Grégoire,
Liberté, responsabilité et utilité: la bonne foi comme
instrument de justice (2010), at p. 225). That is what
is at stake here: whether the ethical standard expressed
 in the common law duty to act honestly in
performance, as a manifestation of the organizing
principle of good faith recognized in Bhasin, limits
the manner in which Baycrest can exercise its right
to terminate the winter maintenance agreement. By
focusing attention on the exercise of a particular
right under a particular contract, a direct link to the
performance of that contract is helpfully drawn.
953
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


[69] Thus, in Houle v. Canadian National Bank,
[1990] 3 S.C.R. 122 — a Quebec case cited in
Bhasin, at para. 85 — the contracting party’s right
to demand repayment of the loan, as stipulated in the
contract, was upheld (p. 169). The “abuse of right”
identified by the Court was the manner in which the
right was exercised. This is, as I have noted, broadly
similar to Bhasin. There, Can-Am had a contractual
right of non-renewal, but Can-Am nonetheless exercised
 that right in a dishonest manner, and thus
breached the duty of honest performance (para. 94).
This was a wrongful exercise of the right in that it
was exercised contrary to the mandatory requirement
of good faith performance.

[70] There are special reasons, of course, to be
cautious in undertaking the comparative exercise to
which Callow invites us here. One is that there are
important differences between the civilian treatment
of abuse of contractual rights and the current state
of the common law. The Civil Code provides that
no right may be exercised with the intent to injure
another or in an excessive and unreasonable manner
and therefore contrary to the requirements of good
faith requiring that parties conduct themselves in
good faith, in particular at the time an obligation
is performed. Insofar as the organizing principle in
Bhasin speaks to a related idea that parties generally
must perform their contractual duties honestly and
reasonably and not capriciously or arbitrarily, this
principle, unlike Quebec law, is not a free-standing
rule but rather a standard that underpins and manifests
 itself in more specific doctrines. Further, in
Bhasin, positive law was only formally extended by
recognizing a general duty of honesty in contractual
performance.

[71] An additional reason is the common law’s
fabled reluctance to embrace the standard associated
with the civilian idea of “abuse of rights”, including
 abuse of contractual rights, a doctrine to which
Bhasin alluded in para. 83 (see, e.g., the survey
in H. C. Gutteridge, “Abuse of Rights” (1933), 5
954


Cambridge L.J. 22, at pp. 22 and 30-31).1 Mindful
of this, Cromwell J. recalled the “fundamental
commitments of the common law of contract” to
the “freedom of contracting parties to pursue their
individual self-interest” and — importantly to the
theory of abuse of rights — that the organizing principle
 he recognized “should not be used as a pretext
for scrutinizing the motives of contracting parties”
(para. 70). Others have observed that the civilian
conception of legal rights — droits subjectifs in the
French tradition — are conceptually different from
“rights” in the common law, or even that the preoc-
cupation with the “social” dimension of limits to
rights, as opposed to a purely “economic” aspect of
a freely-negotiated bargain, is peculiar to the civil
law (see, e.g., F. H. Lawson, Negligence in the Civil
Law (1950), at pp. 15-20). Still others have observed
the differing techniques for the genesis of new rules
of law according to the common law and civil law
methods (see, e.g., P. Daly, “La bonne foi et la common
 law: l’arrêt Bhasin c. Hrynew”, in J. Torres-
Ceyte, G.-A. Berthold and C.-A. M. Péladeau, eds.,
Le dialogue en droit civil (2018), 89, at pp. 101-2).
One should not lose sight of the fact that, as intellectual
 and historical traditions, the common law and
the civil law represent, in many respects, distinctive
ways of knowing the law.

[72] It is true that LeBel J., writing extra-judicially
prior to this Court’s decision in Bhasin, in which he
concurred, noted that in the dialogue between the
common law and the civil law in this Court’s jurisprudence
, good faith offered an example of [translation
] “coexistence” rather than “convergence” or
“divergence” (LeBel, at pp. 12-15). Yet as he noted,
comparison in this field that respects the [translation
] “intellectual integrity” of distinctive traditions
remains a viable part of the dialogue between common
 law and the civil law at this Court (p. 15). While
1
    Mayor of Bradford v. Pickles, [1895] A.C. 587 (H.L.) and, in the
    contractual setting, Allen v. Flood, [1898] A.C. 1 (H.L.), quoting
    from p. 46 of the latter judgment: “. . . any right given by contract
    may be exercised as against the giver by the person to whom it is
    granted, no matter how wicked, cruel, or mean the motive may
    be which determines the enforcement of the right”.
955
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


the requirements of honest contractual performance
in the two legal traditions may be rooted in distinct
histories, they have come together to address similar
issues, at least in the context of dishonest performance
 (Bhasin, at para. 83). The civil law provides
a useful analytical guide to illustrating the relatively
recent common law duty. Two reasons in particular
underlie the usefulness of the comparative exercise
here.

[73] First, I stress that I do not rely on the civil law
here for the specific rules that would govern a similar
 claim in Quebec. Rather, within the constraints
imposed on this Court by the precedent in Bhasin
and the wider common law context, I draw on abuse
of rights as a framework to understand the common
 law duty of honest performance. Second, there
is no serious concern here that looking to Quebec
law will throw the common law into a state of uncertainty
. As Cromwell J. did in Bhasin, this Court
can take comfort from the experience of Quebec to
allay fears that applying this general framework of
wrongful exercise of rights will result in commercial
uncertainty or inappropriately constrain freedom
of contract. Notwithstanding their differences, the
common law and the civil law in Quebec share, in
respect of good faith, some of the “same broad social
 values” that justify comparison generally (Bou
Malhab, at para. 38). As noted, this Court pointed
to a shared concern for the proper compass of good
faith in that it “does not require acting to serve [the
other contracting party’s] interests in all cases” and
both anchor remedies in corrective, not distributive
justice (Churchill Falls, at para. 117, citing Bhasin,
at para. 65). As Professor Moore wrote, prior to his
appointment as a judge [translation] “the value of
individual autonomy, and the fear that good faith is
an imprecise concept, are not exclusive to the common
 law. They are discussed at length in civil law
commentary and jurisprudence” (“Brèves remarques
spontanées sur l’arrêt Bhasin c. Hrynew”, in J. Torres-
Ceyte, G.-A. Berthold and C.-A. M. Péladeau, eds.,
Le dialogue en droit civil (2018), 81, at p. 84). For
these reasons, it is not inappropriate to illustrate the
duty of honest performance using the framework
of the wrongful exercise of a right. Dishonesty is
directly linked to the performance of a given contract
956


where it can be said that the exercise of a right or the
performance of an obligation under that contract has
been dishonest.

[74] Applying Bhasin to this case, and drawing
on the illustration provided by the Quebec civil law
sources Cromwell J. himself cites, I am of the respectful
 view that the Court of Appeal erred when it
concluded that the dishonesty here was only about
a future contract. Properly understood, the alleged
dishonesty in this case was directly linked to the performance
 of the contract because Baycrest’s exercise
of the termination right provided to it under the contract
 was dishonest.

[75] The termination right was exercised dishonestly
 according to the trial judge in our case,
notwithstanding the fact that its terms — the 10-day
notice — were otherwise respected. Pointing to the
dishonest representations, regarding the danger to
the contract and made in anticipation of the notice
period, she held that the duty to act honestly was
linked to the termination of the contract and the exercise
 of that right in the circumstances was a breach
of contract. The trial judge did not deny the right of
Baycrest to terminate the contract, but the manner in
which it did so was wrongful — in breach of the duty
of honesty — and for that it owed Callow damages.
Importantly, this does not deny the existence of the
termination right but fixes on the wrongful manner
in which it was exercised.

  (2) Baycrest’s Conduct Constitutes Dishonesty

[76] The second issue to be resolved is whether
Baycrest’s conduct amounts to dishonesty within
the meaning of the duty of honest performance in
957
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


Bhasin. Callow takes issue with the Court of Appeal’s
conclusion that while the facts may have suggested a
failure to act honourably, they did not rise to the level
of a breach of this duty. To dispose of this appeal,
then, we must determine what standard of honesty
was expected of Baycrest in its exercise of clause 9.

[77] There is common ground that parties to a
contract cannot outright lie or tell half-truths in a
manner that knowingly misleads a counterparty. It is
also agreed here that the failure to disclose a material
 fact, without more, would not be contrary to the
standard. Beyond this, however, the parties continue
to disagree about what might constitute knowingly
misleading conduct as that idea was alluded to in
Bhasin.

[78] Callow argues that while this Court in Bhasin
held that the duty of honest performance does not
impose a duty of disclosure, it left open the possibility
 that an omission to inform can nonetheless
be knowingly misleading in certain circumstances.
Callow acknowledges that the line between a misrepresentation
 and the innocent failure to disclose is not
always easy to draw. But by “positively misleading”
Mr. Callow that the winter maintenance agreement
was likely to be renewed in 2014, he was led to
infer, mistakenly and to the knowledge of Baycrest,
that a decision had not been made to terminate the
existing contract in 2013. Failing to correct this false
impression, in Callow’s view, was a breach of its
obligation to act honestly in the performance of the
winter maintenance agreement. It meant that clause 9
was not exercised in keeping with the obligatory duty
to perform the contract honestly imposed in Bhasin.

[79] Baycrest submits that “active deception” — a
term invoked by the trial judge, as well as both parties
 — requires actual dishonesty, in the sense that an
958


outright lie is necessary. “Silence”, said its counsel at
the hearing, “can only constitute misrepresentation
when there is a duty to speak”. Since the duty of
honest performance does not bring with it a duty of
disclosure, “silence cannot constitute dishonesty or
an act of misrepresentation, whether done intentionally
 or, I suppose, accidentally” (transcript, at p. 37).

[80] Baycrest is right to say that the duty to act
honestly “does not impose a duty of loyalty or of
disclosure or require a party to forego advantages
flowing from the contract” (Bhasin, at para. 73; see
also A. Swan, J. Adamski and A. Y. Na, Canadian
Contract Law (4th ed. 2018), at p. 347). Cromwell J.
referred to United Roasters, Inc. v. Colgate-Palmolive
Co., 649 F.2d 985 (4th Cir. 1981), in support of his
conclusion that the duty of honest performance is
distinct from a free-standing duty to disclose information
 (para. 87). In United Roasters, the terminating
 party had decided in advance of the required
notice period to terminate the contract. The court
held that no disclosure of that intention was required
other than what was stipulated in the contract. In
Cromwell J.’s view, this made “it clear that there is
no unilateral duty to disclose information relevant to
termination” (para. 87).

[81] One might well understand that courts would
shy away from imposing a free-standing positive
duty to disclose information to a counterparty where
it would serve to upset the corrective justice orientation
 of contract law. Whether or not a positive duty
to cooperate of this character should be associated
with the principle of good faith performance in the
common law, a party to a contract has no general
duty to subordinate their interests to that of the other
party in the law as it now stands (see Bhasin, at
para. 86). Requiring a party to speak up in service of
the requirements of good faith where nothing in the
parties’ contractual relationship brings a duty to do
so could be understood to confer an unbargained-for
benefit on the other that would stand outside the
959
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


usual compass of contractual justice. Yet where the
failure to speak out amounts to active dishonesty in
a manner directly related to the performance of the
contract, a wrong has been committed and correcting
it does not serve to confer a benefit on the party who
has been wronged. To this end, Cromwell J. clari-
fied that the “situation is quite different . . . when it
comes to actively misleading or deceiving the other
contracting party in relation to performance of the
contract” (para. 87). In such circumstances, contractual
 parties should be mindful to correct misap-
prehensions, lest a contractual breach of the Bhasin
duty be found.

[82] By noting that liability flowed from active
dishonesty and not a unilateral duty to disclose,
Cromwell J. indicated that the duty of honesty is
consonant with the ordinary principles of contractual
 justice: that Bhasin does not impose a duty to
disclose or a fiduciary-type obligation means that
performing a contract honestly is not a selfless or
altruistic act. One might well say that performing
 one’s own end of a bargain honestly is in keeping
 with the pursuit of self-interest as long as the law
 can be counted on to require the same honest conduct
  from one’s counterparty. Whatever constraints
 it justifies on Baycrest’s ability to terminate the contract
  based on values of honesty associated with
 good faith, it does not require it to confer a benefit
 on Callow in exercising that right. As Cromwell J.
 explained, having appropriate regard for the legitimate
  contractual interests of the contracting parties
 “does not require acting to serve those interests in
 all cases” (para. 65). This explains, to my mind, the
 limited character of the duty of honesty: it is not a
 device that allows a court, in the name of a conception
  of good faith resting on distributive justice, to
 require the party that has to exercise a contractual
 right or power “to serve” the other party’s interest at
 the expense of their own.
960


[83] This emphasis on the corrective justice foun-
dation of the duty to act honestly in performance is,
in my view, helpful to understanding why a facially
unfettered right is nonetheless constrained by the
imperative requirement of good faith explained in
Bhasin. I recall that Cromwell J. sought to reassure
those who feared commercial uncertainty resulting
from the recognition of this new duty by explaining
that the requirement of honest performance “inter-
feres very little with freedom of contract” (para. 76).
After all, the expectation that a contract would be
performed without lies or deception can already be
thought of as a minimum standard that is part of the
bargain. I agree with the sentiment expressed by
the Chief Justice of Alberta in a case that relied on
Bhasin and Potter: “Companies are entitled to expect
that the parties with whom they contract will be honest
” in their contractual dealings (IFP Technologies
(Canada) Inc. v. EnCana Midstream and Marketing,
2017 ABCA 157, 53 Alta. L.R. (6th) 96, at para. 4).
In that sense, while the duty is one of mandatory
law, in most cases it can be thought of as leaving the
agreement and both parties’ expectations — the first
source of justice between the parties — in place. By
extension, requiring that a party exercise a right under
 the contract in keeping with this minimum standard
 only precludes the commission of a wrong and
thus repairing that breach, where damage resulted,
may be thought of as consonant with the principles
of corrective justice. Where a party has lied or otherwise
 knowingly misled the other contracting party
in respect of a matter that is directly linked to the
performance of the contract, it amounts to breach of
contract that must be set right, but the benefits of the
bargain need not be otherwise reallocated between
the parties involved.

[84] That said, I emphasize once again that it is
unquestionable that the duty is imposed as a matter of
contractual doctrine rather than by implication or interpretation
, and, by virtue of its status as contractual
doctrine, parties are “not free to exclude” the duty
altogether (Bhasin, at para. 75). Even if the parties,
961
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


as here, have agreed to a term that provides for an
apparently unfettered right to terminate the contract
for convenience, that right cannot be exercised in a
manner that transgresses the core expectations of
honesty required by good faith in the performance
of contracts.

[85] This framework for measuring the wrongful
exercise of the termination right does not turn on
Baycrest’s motive in exercising clause 9 beyond
the observation that it did so dishonestly. The right
of termination was, on its face, one without cause:
Baycrest may have had legitimate grievances against
Callow or some ulterior motive for its knowing deception
 — it is of no moment. The negative view
that the property manager may have had of Callow,
alluded to by the trial judge (at para. 14), is not the
source of the breach of the duty of honest performance
.

[86] Moreover, I note that Cromwell J. described
the requirements of the duty of honesty negatively:
while the duty of honest performance does not require
 parties to act angelically by subordinating their
own interests to that of their counterparty (Bhasin,
at para. 86), they must refrain from lying or knowingly
 misleading their counterparty (para. 73). As a
“negative” obligation — that is, in the absence of
a recognized duty to act, the injunction it imposes
is one not to act dishonestly — it sits more plainly
with the ordinary objectives of corrective justice and
what one scholar sees as the traditional posture of the
common law in favour of contractual autonomy and
individual freedom in private law. [translation] “It
is clear”, wrote Professor Daly in a comment on the
common law method consecrated in Bhasin, “that
the duty of honesty recognized in Bhasin is a negative
 obligation — not to lie — rather than a positive
obligation — to act in good faith” (pp. 101-2). This
same orientation has been observed as animating
the analogous contractual duty of good faith in the
civil law. While positive obligations to cooperate
in performance may be otherwise required by the
law of good faith, scholars have observed that the
notional equivalent of the duty of honest performance
 in Quebec civil law most typically imposes
negative obligations — to refrain from lying, for
962


example — in the measure of the abuse of a contractual
 right (Baudouin and Jobin, at No. 161). Care
must be taken, I hasten to say, not to confuse the
[translation] “duty to act faithfully” recognized
in this regard, with the fiduciary duty of loyalty that
stands outside of good faith in both legal traditions.

[87] I would add that, as Cromwell J. made plain,
the recognition of the duty to act honestly in performance
 does not necessarily mean that the ideal
spoken to in the organizing principle of good faith set
forth in Bhasin might not manifest itself otherwise.
Even within the limited compass of corrective justice
, circumstances may arise in which the organizing
principle would encourage the view that contractual
rights must be exercised in a manner that was neither
capricious nor arbitrary, for example, or that some
duty to cooperate between the parties be imposed,
though recognizing that, contrary to fiduciary duties,
“good faith performance does not engage duties of
loyalty to the other contracting party or a duty to
put the interests of the other contracting party first”
(Bhasin, at para. 65). But for present purposes, it
is not necessary to go that further step: I am of the
view that where the exercise of a contractual right is
undertaken dishonestly, the exercise is in breach of
contract and this wrong must be corrected. That is
what happened here.

[88] The question that remains is whether Baycrest
lied to or knowingly misled Callow and thus breached
the duty to act honestly.

[89] I recognize that in cases where there is no
outright lie present, like the case before us, it is not
always obvious whether a party “knowingly misled”
its counterparty. Yet, Baycrest is wrong to suggest
that nothing stands between the outright lie and
silence. Elsewhere, as in the law of misrepresentation
 , for instance, one encounters examples of courts
963
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


determining whether a misrepresentation was present
, regardless of whether there was some direct lie
(see A. Swan, “The Obligation to Perform in Good
Faith: Comment on Bhasin v. Hrynew” (2015), 56
Can. Bus. L.J. 395, at p. 402). As Professor Waddams
has written, “[a]n incomplete statement may be as
misleading as a false one, and such half-truths have
frequently been treated as legally significant misrepresentations
.” Ultimately, he wrote, “it is open to
the court to hold that the concealment of the material
facts can, when taken with general statements, true
in themselves but incomplete, turn those statements
into misrepresentations” (The Law of Contracts
(7th ed. 2017), at No. 441). Similarly, where a party
makes a statement it believes to be true, but later circumstances
 affect the truth of that earlier statement,
courts have found, in various contexts, that the party
has an obligation to correct the misrepresentation
(see Xerex Exploration Ltd. v. Petro-Canada, 2005
ABCA 224, 47 Alta. L.R. (4th) 6, at para. 58; see
also C. Mummé, “Bhasin v. Hrynew: A New Era for
Good Faith in Canadian Employment Law, or Just
Tinkering at the Margins?” (2016), 32 Intl J. Comp.
Lab. L. & Ind. Rel. 117, at p. 123).

[90] These examples encourage the view that
the requirements of honesty in performance can,
and often do, go further than prohibiting outright
lies. Indeed, the concept of “misleading” one’s
counterparty — the term invoked separately by
Cromwell J. — will in some circumstances cap-
ture forms of silence or omissions. One can mislead
through action, for example, by saying something
directly to its counterparty, or through inaction, by
failing to correct a misapprehension caused by one’s
own misleading conduct. To me these are close cous-
ins in the catalogue of deceptive contractual practices
(see, e.g., Yam Seng Pte Ltd. v. International Trade
Corp. Ltd., [2013] E.W.H.C. 111, [2013] 1 All E.R.
(Comm.) 1321 (Q.B.), at para. 141).
964


[91] At the end of the day, whether or not a party
has “knowingly misled” its counterparty is a highly
fact-specific determination, and can include lies,
half-truths, omissions, and even silence, depending
 on the circumstances. I stress that this list is
not closed; it merely exemplifies that dishonesty or
misleading conduct is not confined to direct lies. No
reviewable error has been shown in the finding of dishonesty
 that took place in anticipation of the exercise
of clause 9 here. I would not interfere with the trial
judge’s view here on a matter that is owed deference.
Deference should be shown to the trial judge in re-
viewing her discretionary exercise of weighing the
evidence, especially given credibility played a part
in her analysis, as she explained.

[92] Reading the whole of the first instance judgment
, I see no consequential error in the account
given by the trial judge of the law on the duty of honest
 performance. She did not base her conclusions
on some free-standing duty to disclose information.
Instead, she examined whether Baycrest knowingly
misled Callow as to the standing of the winter maintenance
 agreement, and thus wrongfully exercised its
right of termination. Despite this, however, Baycrest
argues that the trial judge erred in failing to recognize
 that its conduct did not reach the “much higher
standard” spoken to in Bhasin. I disagree. No such
error has been shown.

[93] It is helpful for our purposes to recall that on
the facts in Bhasin, part of the dishonest conduct
concerned the respondent Can-Am’s plans to reor-
ganize its activities in Alberta. Its plan contemplated
invoking its contractual right of non-renewal to force
a merger between Mr. Bhasin and his competitor,
Mr. Hrynew. In effect, this reorganization would
have given Mr. Bhasin’s business to Mr. Hrynew.
965
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


Can-Am, however, had said nothing of its plan to
Mr. Bhasin. When Mr. Bhasin first heard of the
merger plans he questioned an official of Can-Am
about its intentions. “[T]he official ‘equivocated’”,
Cromwell J. explained, “and did not tell him the
truth that from Can-Am’s perspective this was a
‘done deal’” (para. 100). Cromwell J. later concluded
that “Can-Am’s breach of contract consisted of its
failure to be honest with Mr. Bhasin about its contractual
 performance and, in particular, with respect
to its settled intentions with respect to renewal”
(para. 108). Cromwell J. wrote: “The trial judge
made a clear finding of fact that Can-Am ‘acted
dishonestly toward Bhasin in exercising the non-renewal
 clause’. There is no basis to interfere with that
finding on appeal. It follows that Can-Am breached
its duty to perform the Agreement honestly” (para. 94
(references omitted)).

[94] It is true that Baycrest remained silent about
its decision to terminate Callow’s contract and that
clause 9, on its face, did not impose on it a duty to
disclose its intention except for on the 10-day notice
requirement. That said, it had to refrain, as the trial
judge said, from “deceiv[ing] Callow” through a
series of “active communications” (para. 66). When
it failed to refrain from doing so in anticipation of
exercising its termination right, it deceived Callow
into thinking it would leave the existing winter services
 agreement intact.

[95] These “active communications”, as I understand
 the trial judge’s findings of fact, came in
two forms. First, Mr. Peixoto made statements to
Mr. Callow suggesting that a renewal of the winter
maintenance agreement was likely. As the trial judge
found, “[a]fter his discussions with Mr. Peixoto and
Mr. Campbell, Mr. Callow thought that he was likely
to get a two-year renewal of his winter maintenance
services contract and [it was] satisfied with his services
 [under the existing agreement which had one
winter to run]. This assumption is also supported by
966


the documentary evidence, especially by the private
e-mails between Mr. Peixoto and Mr. Campbell”
(para. 41).

[96] Baycrest attempts to recast the significance
of this finding, arguing that Mr. Callow only had
casual discussions with two of the JUC members —
Mr. Peixoto and Mr. Campbell — about the possibility
 of a contract renewal. Such casual discussions,
it says, cannot rise to the level of a lie. This position
ignores the key finding in the trial judge’s reasons
that it was Mr. Peixoto — the JUC member who
negotiated the main pricing terms with Callow for
the winter maintenance agreement — who made
statements to Mr. Callow suggesting that a renewal
was likely (paras. 23 and 40-43). After making credibility
 findings against Mr. Peixoto, the trial judge
found that he had “led Mr. Callow to believe that all
was fine with the winter [contract]” and that Baycrest
was “interested in a future extension of Callow’s
contracts” (para. 47). This dishonesty did not take
place in the abstract: the trial judge found it to be
relevant to the exercise of clause 9.

[97] The second form of “active communications”
that deceived Callow was related to the “freebies”
Callow had offered Baycrest in the summer of 2013.
As the trial judge found, Callow performed this free
work because Mr. Callow wanted to provide an incentive
 for Baycrest to renew the winter maintenance
agreement. Baycrest, for its part, gladly accepted the
services offered by Callow.

[98] Again, Baycrest attempts to recast the significance
 of these findings, arguing that “there is nothing
inherently unlawful or unfair about accepting a contractor
’s incentives offered in the hopes of securing a
new contract or the renewal of an existing contract”
(R.F., at para. 112). Whether or not that is the case,
967
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


I again stress that Mr. Peixoto “understood that the
work performed by Callow was a ‘freebie’ to add an
incentive for the boards to renew his winter maintenance
 services contract” and “advised Mr. Callow
that he would tell the other board members about
this work” (trial reasons, at para. 43). These active
communications by Baycrest suggested, deceptively,
that there was hope for renewal and, perforce, the
current contract would not be terminated.

[99] Considering Baycrest’s conduct as a whole
over those few months, it was certainly reasonable
 for Mr. Callow, who was led to believe that a
renewal was likely, to infer that Baycrest had not
decided to terminate the ongoing contract. Moreover,
Baycrest knew Mr. Callow was under this false impression
, as shown by the email sent by Mr. Peixoto
on July 17, 2013 and, nonetheless, continued to
give him the impression that a renewal was likely
even though the decision to terminate him was made
(see trial reasons, at para. 48). Upon realizing that
Mr. Callow was under this false impression, Baycrest
should have corrected the misapprehension; in the
circumstances, its conduct misled Callow.

[100] I respectfully disagree with the idea that the
deception in this case only concerned termination for
unsatisfactory services and did not extend to termination
 for any other reason. The trial judge found that
the dishonest conduct involved representations that
the contract was not in danger at all when Baycrest
knew it would be terminated (para. 65).

[101] The Court of Appeal did not interfere with
these findings, nor has Baycrest argued that the trial
judge made any palpable and overriding errors.
Accordingly, in light of the trial judge’s findings
of fact, I agree that Baycrest intentionally withheld
information in anticipation of exercising clause 9,
knowing that such silence, when combined with
968


its active communications, had deceived Callow.
By failing to correct Mr. Callow’s misapprehension
thereafter, Baycrest breached its contractual duty
of honest performance. This is in stark contrast to
United Roasters, where the defendant merely withheld
 its decision to terminate the agreement. Unlike
in this case, the defendant there did not engage in a
series of acts that it knew would cause the plaintiff
to draw an incorrect inference and then fail to correct
the plaintiff’s misapprehension.

[102] In this sense, this case is broadly similar to
Dunning v. Royal Bank (1996), 23 C.C.E.L. (2d)
71 (Ont. C.J. (Gen. Div.)), one of the examples
of breaches of the duty to exercise good faith in
the manner of dismissal provided by Iacobucci J.
in support of his conclusions in Wallace. While it
was decided in the distinctive good faith setting of
the employment context, Dunning is an appropriate
 analogy to the present case because in Bhasin
Cromwell J. explicitly recognized that “the duty
of honesty was a key component of the good faith
requirements which have been recognized in relation
to termination of employment contracts” (Bhasin, at
para. 73, citing Wallace, at para. 98; Honda Canada
Inc. v. Keays, 2008 SCC 39, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 362, at
para. 58). It seems to me that if the duty of honest
performance was a key component of the good faith
requirements spoken to in Wallace and Keays, a similar
 framework applies, again bound together through
the organizing principle. As Iacobucci J. explained,
the employee’s job in Dunning had been eliminated,
but the employer told him another position would
probably be found for him and the new assignment
would necessitate a transfer. While the employee was
being reassured about his future, the employer was
contemplating his termination. Eventually, the employer
 chose to terminate the employee but withheld
that information from the employee for some time,
despite knowing the employee was in the process of
selling his home in anticipation of the transfer. News
of the termination only came after the employee had
sold his home. Such conduct, Iacobucci J. observed,
969
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


clearly violated the expected standard of good faith
in the manner of dismissal.

[103] As Dunning, Wallace and Keays make plain,
an employer has the right to terminate an employment
 contract without cause, subject to the duty to
provide reasonable notice. However broad that right
may be, however, an unhappy employee can allege
a distinct contractual breach when the employer has
mistreated them in the manner of dismissal. In the
end, as Cromwell J. noted, “contracting parties must
be able to rely on a minimum standard of honesty
from their contracting partner in relation to performing
 the contract as a reassurance that if the contract
does not work out, they will have a fair opportunity
to protect their interests” (Bhasin, at para. 86). When
Baycrest deliberately remained silent, while knowing
that Mr. Callow had drawn the mistaken inference the
contract was in good standing because it was likely
to be renewed, it breached the duty to act honestly. In
my view, the trial judge did not create a new duty of
disclosure in correcting that wrong but rather sought
to denounce the Baycrest’s conduct. Remedying
that with an order for damages to repair Baycrest’s
failure to exercise clause 9 in accordance with the
requirements of the duty of honest performance did
not confer a benefit on Callow; it merely set matters
right on the usual measure of corrective justice following
 this breach of contract. Respectfully stated, it
is therefore my view that the Court of Appeal erred
in concluding that Baycrest’s conduct was dishon-
ourable but not dishonest.

[104] I would note, however, that I do agree in
part with the Court of Appeal’s observation that the
trial judge went too far in concluding that “[t]he
minimum standard of honesty would have been to
970


address the alleged performance issues, to provide
prompt notice, or to refrain from any representations
in anticipation of the notice period” (trial reasons, at
para. 67). In my respectful view, to impute these first
two requirements would amount to altering the bargain
 struck between the parties substantively, a conclusion
 not sought by Callow before this Court. That
said, I agree with the trial judge that, at a minimum,
Baycrest had to refrain from false representations in
anticipation of the notice period. Having failed to
correct Mr. Callow’s misapprehension that arose due
to these false representations, I too would recognize a
contractual breach on the part of Baycrest in the exercise
 of its right of termination in clause 9. Damages
thus flow for the consequential loss of opportunity,
a matter to which I now turn.

C. Damages

[105] Baycrest submits that Callow is not entitled
to any damages for the breach. Baycrest argues that
the trial judge erred in fixing the quantum of damages
, first, by awarding Callow its expected profits
 over the full balance of the contract; second, by
misapprehending the evidence relating to Callow’s
expenses; and, finally, by awarding both the loss of
profit and the expenses incurred.

[106] On the first point, I note that the trial judge
correctly proceeded on the premise that, “[d]ue to the
breach of contract, [Callow] is entitled to be placed
in the same position as if the breach had not occurred
” (para. 79). Indeed, as Cromwell J. explained
in Bhasin, breach of the duty of honest contractual
performance supports a claim for damages according
to the ordinary contractual measure (para. 88).
971
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


[107] The ordinary approach is to award contractual
 damages corresponding to the expectation interest
 (Atlantic Lottery Corp. Inc. v. Babstock, 2020
SCC 19, [2020] 2 S.C.R. 420, at para. 108). That
is, damages should put Callow in the position that
it would have been in had the duty been performed.

[108] While it has rightly been observed that reliance
 damages and expectation damages will be the
same in many if not most cases, they are nevertheless
conceptually distinct. As Professor Stephen Smith
wrote: “Defendants are ordered to do what they
promised to do, not to do whatever is necessary to
ensure the claimant is not harmed by relying on
the promise” (Atiyah’s Introduction to the Law of
Contract (6th ed. 2006), at p. 405). Damages corresponding
 to the reliance interest are the ordinary
measure of damages in tort (PreMD Inc. v. Ogilvy
Renault LLP, 2013 ONCA 412, 309 O.A.C. 139, at
para. 65). This measure may be appropriate where
it would be difficult for the plaintiff to prove the
position they would have been in had the contract
been performed. Reliance damages in contract mean
putting the injured party in the position it would
have been in had it not entered into the contract at
all (para. 66).

[109] I see no basis to hold that a breach of the duty
of honest performance should in general be compensated
 by way of reliance damages. I recall that the
duty of honest performance is a doctrine of contract
law. Its breach is not a tort. Not only would basing
damages in this case on the reliance interest set this
contractual breach apart from the ordinary measure
of contractual damages, but it would depart from
the measure as it was applied in Bhasin (para. 108;
see also MacDougall, at §1.130). In my respectful
view, there is no basis to depart from Bhasin on
this point which, in any event, was not argued by
the parties. Further, I note that this view is shared
by authors who have written that the duty of honest
performance protects a party’s expectation interest,
972


rather than reliance interest (see, e.g., McCamus
(2015), at pp. 112-13). Finally, while reliance damages
 and expectation damages coincide on the facts
here, there is good reason to retain, in my view, the
ordinarily applicable measure of contractual damages
 that seeks to provide the plaintiff with what
they had expected. Professor Waddams has written
that this can have a positive deterrent effect: “One
of the legitimate arguments in favour of the current
rule and against a rule measuring damages only by
the plaintiff’s reliance is that a rule protecting only
reliance would fail to deter breach in a large number
 of cases where the defendant calculated that
the plaintiff’s provable losses were less tha[n] the
cost of performance” (“Breach of Contract and the
Concept of Wrongdoing” (2000), 12 S.C.L.R. (2d)
1, at pp. 18-19).

[110] Baycrest nevertheless argues that the trial
judge did not actually consider what position Callow
would be in if it had fulfilled the duty and instead
awarded the value of the balance of the winter maintenance
 agreement. In so doing, it argues, she fell
into the same error as the trial judge in Bhasin, who
simply awarded damages as though the contract had
been renewed. Baycrest says that this Court has appropriately
 condemned this approach because the
parties did not intend or presume a perpetual contract
.

[111] Moreover, Baycrest points to Hamilton v.
Open Window Bakery Ltd., 2004 SCC 9, [2004] 1
S.C.R. 303, for the proposition that damages are
assessed by that mode of performance which is least
burdensome to the defendant. Callow, it is said, is
entitled to no more than the minimum that Baycrest
was obligated to do pursuant to the contract. Since
973
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


clause 9 allowed it to terminate the winter maintenance
 agreement at any point on 10 days’ notice, no
damages should flow.

[112] In my view, Hamilton is of no assistance
to Baycrest in this case. While Cromwell J. ref-
erenced this principle in Bhasin, he did so in the
context of whether the Court should recognize a
broad, free-standing duty of good faith, for which
the appellant there had argued. Briefly stated, the appellant
’s position was that the respondent, Can-Am,
would have been in breach of such a duty since
it had attempted to use the non-renewal clause to
force Mr. Bhasin into a merger. Cromwell J. declined
 to recognize such a broad duty, reasoning
that “Can-Am’s contractual liability would still have
to be measured by reference to the least onerous
means of performance, which in this case would have
meant simply not renewing the contract” (Bhasin,
at para. 90; see also J. D. McCamus, The Law of
Contracts (3rd ed. 2020), at pp. 23-25). Because
no damages would have flowed from this breach,
it was unnecessary for the Court to decide whether
a broad, free-standing duty of good faith should be
recognized.

[113] It bears emphasizing that, despite
Cromwell J.’s comments related to Hamilton, he
nonetheless awarded damages to the appellant flowing
 from the breach of the respondents’ obligation
to perform the contract honestly. Damages were
awarded using the ordinary measure of contractual
expectation damages, namely to put Mr. Bhasin in
the position he would have been in had Can-Am
not breached its obligation to behave honestly in
the exercise of the non-renewal clause (Bhasin, at
paras. 88 and 108). This resulted in Mr. Bhasin being
compensated for the value of his business that eroded
(paras. 108-10). As Professors O’Byrne and Cohen
helpfully explain, “if Can-Am had dealt with Bhasin
honestly on all fronts (though without requiring it to
disclose its intention not to renew), Bhasin would
have realized much sooner that his relationship with
Can-Am was in tremendous jeopardy and reaching a
breaking point. He could have taken proactive steps
974


to protect his business, instead of seeing it ‘in effect,
expropriated and turned over to Mr. Hrynew’” (“The
Contractual Principle of Good Faith and the Duty of
Honesty in Bhasin v. Hrynew” (2015), 53 Alta. L.R.
1, at p. 8 (footnotes omitted)).

[114] How is it that damages were awarded for a
breach of the duty of honest performance despite the
principle outlined in Hamilton? While damages are
to be measured against a defendant’s least onerous
means of performance, the least onerous means of
performance in this case would have been to correct
the misrepresentation once Baycrest knew Callow
had drawn a false inference. Had it done so, Callow
would have had the opportunity to secure another
contract for the upcoming winter. As Callow explained
 at the hearing, “since this dishonesty caused
Callow a loss by inducing it not to bid on other contracts
 during the summer of 2013 for the winter of
2013 to 2014, the condos are liable to it for damages”
(transcript, at p. 5), which reflect its lost opportunity
arising out of its abuse of clause 9.

[115] It may be true that the trial judge could have
explained her rationale for awarding damages more
plainly. But even if the trial judge fell into the same
error that the trial judge in Bhasin committed, so as
to award damages as though the contract had carried
on, it was one of no consequence.

[116] As the trial judge found, Baycrest “failed
to provide a fair opportunity for [Callow] to protect
 its interests” (para. 67). Had Baycrest acted
honestly in exercising its right of termination, and
thus corrected Mr. Callow’s false impression, Callow
would have taken proactive steps to bid on other
contracts for the upcoming winter (A.F., at paras. 91-
95). Indeed, there was ample evidence before the
trial judge that Callow had opportunities to bid on
975
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


other winter maintenance contracts in the summer of
2013, but chose to forego those opportunities due to
Mr. Callow’s misapprehension as to the status of the
contract with Baycrest. In any event, even if I were to
conclude that the trial judge did not make an explicit
finding as to whether Callow lost an opportunity, it
may be presumed as a matter of law that it did, since
it was Baycrest’s own dishonesty that now precludes
Callow from conclusively proving what would have
happened if Baycrest had been honest (see Lamb v.
Kincaid (1907), 38 S.C.R. 516, at pp. 539-40).

[117] In the result, I see no palpable and overriding
error. I am satisfied that, if Baycrest’s dishonesty
had not deprived Callow of the opportunity to bid
on other contracts, then Callow would have made
an amount that was at least equal to the profit it lost
under the winter maintenance agreement. The trial
judge found that, once expenses are deducted, that
award amounts to $64,306.96. I see no reason to
interfere with her fact finding as to the estimation of
expenses. Consequently, I see no basis for overturning
 this portion of the trial judge’s award of damages.

[118] The trial judge also awarded Callow
$14,835.14, representing the cost of leasing a piece
of machinery for one year. Mr. Callow testified
that he had leased the machinery specifically for
the winter maintenance agreement, but would not
have had he known the contract would be terminated
(para. 81). Baycrest submits that the trial judge erred
by awarding these expenses because it amounts to
double recovery.

[119] I see no issue of double recovery in this case.
The trial judge awarded the $64,306.96 as lost profit,
not lost revenue. This is appropriate because Callow
was not actually hired for the other contract on which
976


it did not bid and therefore did not necessarily have
to undertake all the expenses that would have been
required to fulfill that contract. However, as Callow
had already committed to this expense, the lease
of the machinery, it too should be compensated for
along with the lost profit. The trial judge was entitled
to decide this point as she did, having the advantage
of measuring losses first hand. I see no reviewable
error in the trial judge’s approach on this issue.

V. Disposition

[120] I would allow the appeal, set aside the order
of the Court of Appeal and reinstate the judgment of
the trial judge, with costs throughout.

  The reasons of Moldaver, Brown and Rowe JJ.
were delivered by

     Brown J. — Brown J.

I.

[121] This appeal invites us to affirm the scope
and operation of the duty of honest performance,
recognized in Bhasin v. Hrynew, 2014 SCC 71,
[2014] 3 S.C.R. 494, by clarifying the distinction
between actively misleading conduct and innocent
non-disclosure. Applying that distinction to the
facts of this appeal, is a straightforward matter. As
the trial judge found, the respondents (collectively,
“Baycrest”) represented to Callow (referring inter-
changeably in these reasons to the appellant and its
principal) that its contract would not be terminated
(2017 ONSC 7095). By relying on Baycrest’s representations
, Callow lost the opportunity to secure
other work for the contract’s term. Callow’s complaint
 therefore does not relate to Baycrest’s silence
but rather to its positive representations, which can
clearly ground a claim based on the duty of honest
performance.
977
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


[122] Given that Baycrest did not identify any palpable
 and overriding errors in the trial judge’s findings
, I agree with the majority that the appeal should
be allowed and the trial judge’s award restored.
Regrettably, however, I am compelled to express my
respectful objection to the majority’s view that the
doctrine of abuse of right in the civil law of Quebec
is “useful” and “helpful” in understanding the application
 of Bhasin to this appeal (para. 57). Again
respectfully, I see this digression as neither “useful”
nor “helpful” to the judges and lawyers who must
try to understand the common law principles of good
faith as developed in this judgment. Indeed, it will
only inject uncertainty and confusion into the law.

[123] This is not to suggest that comparative legal
 analysis is not an important tool or that its use
should somehow be unduly limited at this Court. As
the majority’s reasons amply document, the Court
has a longstanding tradition of looking to Quebec’s
civil law in developing the common law — whether
to answer a question that the common law does not
answer (that is, to fill a “gap”) or where it is necessary
 to modify or otherwise develop existing rules.
In addition, where concerns are raised about the
effects of moving the common law in one direction
or another, this Court has considered the experience
in Quebec and elsewhere, often for reassurance that
the posited concerns are unfounded or overstated.
What this Court has refrained from doing, however,
is deploying comparative legal analysis that serves
none of these purposes or, even worse, renders the
law obscure to those who must know and apply it.
But by invoking the civilian abuse of right framework
to clarify when “[d]ishonesty is directly linked to
the performance of a given contract” (para. 73) — a
question requiring no “clarification” — the majority
does exactly that.
978


[124] While, therefore, my objection is fundamentally
 methodological, it also speaks to the substantive
consequences that follow. As the majority acknowledges
, this appeal concerns the duty of honest performance
, not the duty to exercise discretionary powers
in good faith. And yet, its digression into the notion
of “wrongful exercise of a right”, in substance, pulls
it into that very territory, since it ties dishonesty
to the manner in which contractual discretion is
exercised. Effectively, then, the majority’s reliance
on a civil law concept leads it to conflate, or at least
obscure the distinction between what are distinct
common law concepts. This is both unnecessary
and undesirable, since the exercise of discretion —
apart from being a matter of performance that may
be misrepresented — has little to do with the duty
of honest performance. Rather, the duty to exercise
discretionary powers in good faith — or, expressed
with the civilian terminology the majority adds, in
a manner that is not “abusive” or “wrongful” — is a
distinct concept that has no application to this appeal.

[125] Our aim in deciding this appeal should be
to develop the common law’s organizing principle
of good faith carefully, and in a coherent manner,
and more particularly in a manner that gives clear
guidance by taking care to distinguish among the
distinct doctrines identified by this Court in Bhasin.
Respectfully, I say that the majority has not done
so here.

II. Background

[126] Baycrest comprises 10 condominium corporations
 with shared assets, for which decisions
are made by a Joint Use Committee. In April 2012,
Baycrest entered into two separate two-year agreements
 with Callow to provide summer landscaping
and winter snow removal services. The terms of the
979
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


winter service agreement stipulated that Baycrest
could terminate the agreement, without cause, upon
giving 10 days’ notice.

[127] In March or April 2013, the Joint Use
Committee voted to terminate the winter service
agreement earlier than its scheduled expiry in April
2014. Baycrest opted not to tell Callow about its
decision until September 2013, however, so as not
to jeopardize his performance under the summer
service agreement. Unaware of Baycrest’s decision,
Callow performed free work for Baycrest in the
spring and summer of 2013 in the hope that Baycrest
would renew both agreements. Callow also discussed
the prospect of renewal with two Baycrest represent-
atives, one of whom had negotiated Callow’s existing
agreements in 2012. These discussions led him to
believe that he was likely to receive a two-year contract
 renewal in 2014 and, therefore, that the winter
service agreement was not in danger. Knowing that
Callow was operating under this misapprehension,
Baycrest nevertheless continued to withhold information
 about its termination decision.

[128] On September 12, 2013, Baycrest gave
Callow notice that it was terminating the winter service
 agreement. Callow sued, claiming that Baycrest
failed to perform the winter service agreement in
good faith and was therefore liable for breach of
contract. The trial judge held that Baycrest breached
the duty of honest performance. She found that
Baycrest’s statements and conduct actively deceived
Callow and led him to believe that the winter service
 contract would not be terminated. As a result,
she awarded damages to place Callow in the position
 that it would have been in had the contract not
been terminated. The Court of Appeal for Ontario
reversed, stating that the duty of honest performance
does not impose a requirement of disclosure (2018
ONCA 896, 429 D.L.R. (4th) 704). In its view, even
if Baycrest had misled Callow, Callow bargained
980


only for 10 days’ notice of termination and that was
the extent of its entitlement.

III. Analysis

A. This Case Can Be Readily Decided by Applying
   the Common Law Principle of Good Faith

[129] Disposing of this case is really a simple
matter of applying this Court’s decision in Bhasin.
 The first step in deciding a common law good faith
 claim is to consider whether any established good
 faith doctrines apply. Callow bases its claim on two
 established doctrines: the duty of honest performance
  and the duty to exercise discretionary powers
 in good faith. As I will explain, however, Callow’s
 claim should be resolved by applying only the duty
 of honest performance.

  (1) The Duty of Honest Performance

[130] As a universally applicable minimum
standard, all contracts must be performed honestly.
Contracting parties may therefore not lie to, or otherwise knowingly mislead, each other about matters
directly linked to performance (Bhasin, at paras. 73-
74). If a plaintiff suffers loss in reliance on its counterparty
’s misleading conduct, the duty of honest
performance serves to make the plaintiff whole. The
duty of honest performance does not, however, “impose
 a duty of loyalty or of disclosure or require a
party to forego advantages flowing from the contract
” (Bhasin, at para. 73).

[131] The dividing line between (1) actively misleading
 conduct, and (2) permissible non-disclosure,
is the central issue in this appeal. As that line has
been clearly demarcated by cases addressing misrepresentation
 in other contexts, it is in my view worth
981
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


affirming here that the same settled principles apply
to the duty of honest performance. The duty of honest
performance is, after all, broadly comparable to the
doctrine of fraudulent misrepresentation, although
it applies (unlike misrepresentation) to representations
 made after contract formation (B. MacDougall,
Misrepresentation (2016), at pp. 63-64). It follows
that those representations sufficient to ground a
claim for misrepresentation are analogous to the
representations that will support a claim based on
the duty of honest performance.

[132] The general rule, applicable to contracts
other than those requiring utmost good faith, is that
contracting parties have no duty to disclose material
 information (Bhasin, at paras. 73 and 86). Mere
silence therefore cannot be considered actively misleading
 conduct (Alevizos v. Nirula, 2003 MBCA 148,
180 Man. R. (2d) 186, at para. 19). In some cases,
however, silence on a particular topic is misleading
in light of what has been said (Xerex Exploration
Ltd. v. Petro-Canada, 2005 ABCA 224, 47 Alta.
L.R. (4th) 6, at para. 56, citing Opron Construction
Co. v. Alberta (1994), 151 A.R. 241 (Q.B.)). Again,
no wheels need re-inventing here. There is, in the
context of misrepresentation, “a rich law accepting
that sometimes silence or half-truths amount to a
statement” (MacDougall, at p. 67; see also A. Swan,
“The Obligation to Perform in Good Faith: Comment
on Bhasin v. Hrynew” (2015), 56 Can. Bus. L.J. 395,
at p. 402). A contracting party therefore may not create
 a misleading picture about its contractual performance
 by relying on half-truths or partial disclosure
(Peek v. Gurney (1873), L.R. 6 H.L. 377; Alevizos, at
paras. 24-25; Xerex, at paras. 56-57). And contracting
parties are required to correct representations that are
subsequently rendered false, or which the representor
later discovers were erroneous (Xerex, at para. 58;
MacDougall, at pp. 118-19).
982


[133] Further, the representation need not take
the form of an express statement. So long as it is
clearly communicated, it may comprise other acts or
conduct on the part of the defendant (MacDougall,
at p. 87). The question is whether the defendant’s
active conduct contributed to a misapprehension
that could be corrected only by disclosing additional
information. If so, the defendant must make that
disclosure. Conversely, a contracting party is not
required to correct a misapprehension to which it has
not contributed (T. Buckwold, “The Enforceability of
Agreements to Negotiate in Good Faith: The Impact
of Bhasin v. Hrynew and the Organizing Principle
of Good Faith in Common Law Canada” (2016), 58
Can. Bus. L.J. 1, at p. 13). The entire context, which
includes the nature of the parties’ relationship, is to
be considered in determining, objectively, whether
the defendant made a misrepresentation to the plaintiff
 (MacDougall, at p. 102; see, e.g., Outaouais
Synergest Inc. v. Lang Michener LLP, 2013 ONCA
526, 116 O.R. (3d) 742, at paras. 84-87; C.R.F.
Holdings Ltd. v. Fundy Chemical International Ltd.
(1981), 33 B.C.L.R. 291 (C.A.), at p. 296). It follows
that the question of whether a misrepresentation
has been made is a question of mixed fact and law,
subject to appellate review only for palpable and
overriding error.

[134] In light of these principles — which, again,
are well established and require nothing more than
a statement by this Court of their application to
the duty of honest performance — I cannot accept
Baycrest’s argument that its conduct fell on the
side of innocent non-disclosure. Indeed, the trial
judge found that “active communications between
the parties between March/April and September
12, 2013 . . . deceived Callow” (para. 66 (CanLII)).
Based on Baycrest’s conduct and express statements,
the trial judge found that Baycrest had represented
that the winter service agreement was not in danger
of termination (paras. 65 and 76). Further, the trial
judge found that Baycrest knew that its representations
 were misleading and nonetheless expressed its
intention of keeping Callow in the dark (paras. 48
and 69). These findings are sufficient to support the
conclusion that Baycrest breached the duty of honest
983
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


performance. And Baycrest identifies no palpable
and overriding error to justify overturning them.

[135] Nor do I accept Baycrest’s argument that
its representations related only to the renewal of a
new winter agreement and not to the termination of
Callow’s existing agreement. As I have explained,
whether Baycrest made an actionable representation
about its performance must be determined in context,
which included its conduct as I have described it.
And it was open to the trial judge to conclude from
that conduct that Callow reasonably inferred that the
winter service agreement would not be terminated
(see, e.g., Queen v. Cognos Inc., [1993] 1 S.C.R. 87,
at pp. 128-32). Again, I see no basis for disturbing
the trial judge’s conclusion.

  (2) The Duty to Exercise Discretionary Powers
      in Good Faith

[136] Callow also argues that Baycrest’s decision to terminate the winter service agreement
was a discretionary decision that it was required
to make in good faith. He relies on the good faith
duty that arises “where one party exercises a discretionary
 power under the contract”, and which
was affirmed by this Court in Bhasin (para. 47).
As a preliminary matter, I note that not every decision
 that involves a degree of discretion is subject
to this duty (Bhasin, at para. 72; J. T. Robertson,
“Good Faith as an Organizing Principle in Contract
Law: Bhasin v Hrynew — Two Steps Forward and
One Look Back” (2015), 93 Can. Bar Rev. 809, at
p. 859). The extent to which it applies to unfettered
termination rights remains unsettled, and I do not
purport to resolve that controversy here (Styles v.
Alberta Investment Management Corp., 2017 ABCA
1, 44 Alta. L.R. (6th) 214, at para. 41; Mohamed v.
Information Systems Architects Inc., 2018 ONCA
428, 423 D.L.R. (4th) 174, at para. 19).
984


[137] This duty limits the exercise of certain contractual
 powers that may appear to grant one party
unfettered discretion. For the purposes of this appeal
, it is unnecessary to express a firm view on the
standard that applies to a breach of this duty. It is
sufficient to note that where a plaintiff relies on this
duty, its complaint is not about dishonesty; rather,
it is that the defendant was not entitled to make the
decision that it made. The wrongful behavior is the
very exercise of discretion, and the plaintiff therefore
bases its claim on the effect of that decision (see,
e.g., Greenberg v. Meffert (1985), 50 O.R. (2d) 755
(C.A.); Mesa Operating Ltd. Partnership v. Amoco
Canada Resources Ltd. (1994), 19 Alta. L.R. (3d)
38 (C.A.)). Damages are awarded based on the difference
 between the outcome that occurred and the
outcome that would have occurred if the defendant
had exercised its discretion in the least onerous, yet
lawfully acceptable, manner.

[138] Callow, however, does not dispute that
Baycrest was entitled to terminate the winter service
agreement, as it did, without cause and by providing
 only 10 days’ notice. Rather, Callow impugns
the dishonesty that preceded Baycrest’s exercise of
discretion. Callow therefore seeks damages measured
 by considering what would have happened had
Baycrest made the same decision, albeit without
misrepresenting its intentions. The applicable duty
is therefore the duty of honest performance. In sum,
the appeal at bar presents a case about dishonesty
in the performance of a contract, and nothing more.
Indeed, it represents precisely the sort of instance
contemplated by Cromwell J.’s reference for this
Court in Bhasin, at para. 73, to circumstances where
a party “lie[s] or mislead[s] the other party about
one’s contractual performance”. Conversely, it is not
a case about the exercise of a discretionary power.

  (3) Damages

[139] Having concluded that Baycrest breached the
duty of honest performance, the remaining issue is
985
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


whether the trial judge awarded the appropriate quantum
 of damages. While I reach the same result as the
majority, I approach this question somewhat differently
 than it does. The majority would retain the expectation
 measure of damages for breach of the duty
of honest performance. I say, however, that it follows
from recognizing Baycrest’s misleading conduct as a
wrong independent of the termination provision that
the proper measure of damages represents the loss
Callow suffered in reliance on Baycrest’s misleading
representations (which I accept will often coincide
with the expectation measure).

[140] The majority relies on Cromwell J.’s statement
 in Bhasin that a breach of the duty of honest
contractual performance “supports a claim for damages
 according to the contractual rather than the
tortious measure” (para. 88). But when the purpose
of the expectation measure of damages for breach of
contract is examined and contrasted with the legal
framework developed in Bhasin, the actual claim
in Bhasin and the damages actually received, it becomes
 readily apparent that the reliance measure is
precisely the measure that the Bhasin framework
contemplates should be awarded. On this point, the
majority’s reasons represent not fidelity to Bhasin,
but a regrettable departure that undermines the coherence
 between the interests sought to be protected
in Bhasin and the remedy to be awarded.

[141] It has “long been settled and [is] indeed
axiomatic” that the legal aim in remedying a breach
 of contract is to give the innocent party the full
 benefit of the bargain by placing it in the position
 it would have occupied had the contract been performed
  (P. Benson, Justice in Transactions: A Theory
 of Contract Law (2019), at p. 5; see also Fidler v.
 Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada, 2006 SCC 30,
 [2006] 2 S.C.R. 3, at para. 27). Awarding a reliance
  measure — that is, compensating for losses
986


sustained by the innocent party in reliance on the
contract — would ignore the innocent party’s right
to performance that flows from its having pledged
consideration therefor, thereby potentially depriving
it of the benefit of the contract. Indeed, confining
recovery to losses sustained in reliance on the agreement
 would create an incentive to breach agreements
where the cost of performance outweighs the reliance
measure of damage (S. M. Waddams, The Law of
Contracts (7th ed. 2017), at para. 704; see also L. L.
Fuller and W. R. Perdue Jr., “The Reliance Interest
in Contract Damages” (1936), 46 Yale L.J. 52, at
pp. 57-66).

[142] But the justification for awarding expectation
damages does not apply to breach of the duty of
honest performance. In such cases, the issue is not
that the defendant has failed to perform the contract,
thereby defeating the plaintiff’s expectations. It is,
rather, that the defendant has performed the contract,
but has also caused the plaintiff loss by making dishonest
 extra-contractual misrepresentations concerning
 that performance, upon which the plaintiff relied
to its detriment. In short, the plaintiff’s complaint is
not lost value of performance, but detrimental reliance
 on dishonest misrepresentations. The interest
being protected is not an expectation interest, but
a reliance interest. And just as these are unrelated
interests, an expectation measure of damage is unrelated
 to the breach of the duty of honest performance.

[143] The claim in Bhasin itself is illustrative.
Bhasin contracted to sell financial products for
Can-Am. The contract would renew automatically
at the end of the initial term unless one of the parties
gave six months’ notice of non-renewal. Can-Am
intended to force a takeover of Bhasin’s business
by his competitor, Hrynew, but misled him about its
intention to do so. Can-Am also appointed Hrynew
to audit Bhasin’s business. When Bhasin protested
this conflict of interest, Can-Am lied to him about
987
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


the reason for Hrynew’s appointment as auditor and
the terms that would govern his access to Bhasin’s
confidential information. Ultimately, when Can-Am
gave notice of non-renewal, Bhasin lost the value
of his business. This Court found that, but for Can-
Am’s dishonesty in the period leading up to the non-renewal, he “would have been able to retain the value
of his business rather than see it, in effect, expropriated
 and turned over to Mr. Hrynew” (para. 109). It
awarded damages to compensate for the lost value
of the business.

[144] Neither the claim, then, nor the damage
award, related to Can-Am’s failure to perform the
contract with Bhasin. The theory of the judgment
was that Bhasin lost the value of his business by
relying on Can-Am’s dishonest representations. The
relief actually awarded was therefore measured by
the difference between Bhasin’s position and the position
 he would have occupied had Can-Am not been
dishonest about its intention to force a takeover by
way of cancelling his contract. Had Bhasin not relied
on Can-Am’s dishonesty, no damages could have
been awarded on this basis, because the dishonesty
would not have altered his position.

[145] The measure applied in Bhasin was, therefore
, clearly not based on expected performance, and
indeed it appears to have had nothing to do with placing
 Bhasin in the position he would have occupied
had the contract been performed (K. Maharaj, “An
Action on the Equities: Re-Characterizing Bhasin
as Equitable Estoppel” (2017), 55 Alta. L. Rev. 199,
at p. 215). Rather, it was directed solely towards
making good the detriment that flowed from Bhasin’s
reliance on a dishonest misrepresentation — a measure
 characterized by one scholar as “very tort-like”
(MacDougall, at p. 65). Much like estoppel and civil
fraud, therefore, the duty of honest performance vindicates
 the plaintiff’s reliance interest (Robertson, at
988


p. 861; Maharaj, at pp. 215-18). A contracting party
that breaches this duty will be liable to compensate
its counterparty for any foreseeable losses suffered
in reliance on the misleading representations.

[146] This is not to suggest that the duty of honest
performance is “subsumed” by estoppel and civil
fraud (Kasirer J.’s reasons, at para. 50). Rather, it is
merely to observe that each of these legal devices
protects the same interest. Indeed, far from being
“subsumed” into estoppel and civil fraud, the duty
of honest performance protects the reliance interest
 in a distinct and broader manner since, as this
Court observed in Bhasin, the defendant may be
held liable even where it does not intend for the
plaintiff to rely on the misleading representation
(para. 88). Irrespective of the defendant’s intention,
all a plaintiff need show is that, but for its reliance
on the misleading representation, it would not have
sustained the loss.

[147] Baycrest advances three arguments for re-
ducing the trial award. First, it says that the 10 day
notice period defines its maximum exposure for damages
 because, irrespective of its dishonesty, its least
onerous means of performance was to terminate
the agreement. The trial judge therefore incorrectly
awarded damages as if the winter contract had not
been terminated.

[148] While Baycrest is correct to say that damages
 for breach of contract are measured against
the defendant’s least onerous means of performance
(Hamilton v. Open Window Bakery Ltd., 2004 SCC
9, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 303, at para. 20), that principle
does not assist Baycrest here. To perform the contract
 honestly (that is, without breaching the duty of
honest performance), Baycrest was required not to
mislead Callow about whether the contract would
be terminated. It could have accomplished this by
989
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


keeping silent about termination or, having misled
Callow as to the true state of affairs, by correcting
 Callow’s misapprehension before he relied on
the misleading conduct to his detriment. Had either
of these possibilities occurred, Callow would have
been able to seek other work for the 2013-14 winter
season.

[149] Of course, we cannot say with certainty that
Callow would have secured other work. He might
have sat idle in any event, assuming that the winter
 service contract was in good standing. But this
evidentiary difficulty is the product of Baycrest’s
dishonesty, and Baycrest should not be relieved from
liability simply because Callow cannot definitively
prove what would have occurred had it not been
misled (Wood v. Grand Valley Rway. Co. (1915), 51
S.C.R. 283, at pp. 288-91; see also Lamb v. Kincaid
(1907), 38 S.C.R. 516, at pp. 539-40). Callow gave
evidence that it typically bid on winter contracts
during the summer months and that it was too late to
find replacement work by the time it was notified of
termination. I agree with the majority that, based on
the record, we can reasonably presume that Callow
would have been able to replace the winter service
agreement with a contract of similar value. While
the trial judge erred by awarding damages as if the
winter service agreement had not been terminated,
I would, based on this presumption, award the same
quantum of damages.

[150] Secondly, Baycrest says that the trial judge’s
award led to double recovery for Callow’s expenses.
But this is simply incorrect. The trial judge awarded
Callow the net value of the winter service agreement
($64,306.96) — representing the gross contract value
($80,383.70) less Callow’s expenses, which the trial
judge approximated at 20 percent ($16,076.74). She
then added back the cost of an equipment lease,
which Callow had already entered into in reliance
on Baycrest’s misleading representations. Though
990


the trial judge did not say so expressly, the record
shows that Callow’s approximated expenses included
the cost of leasing equipment. If Callow is not re-
imbursed for the leasing expenses that he incurred
in reliance on Baycrest’s misleading representations
, those expenses would therefore be counted
against him twice. Absent Baycrest’s breach of contract
, Callow would have obtained a similarly val-
ued contract and ended the 2013-14 winter season
with $64,306.96 in profit. The trial judge’s approach
ensured that Callow was restored to this position,
and, accordingly, I see no basis for overturning this
aspect of her award.

[151] Finally, Baycrest argues that the trial judge
misapprehended the evidence relating to Callow’s
expenses. I am not convinced, however, that the trial
judge did anything other than estimate Callow’s
expenses at 20 percent of the winter service contract
 ’s value, based on evidence that Callow gave
 regarding its expenses in previous years. Estimating
 the expenses was a decision that fell within the trial
 judge’s remit as a fact-finder and should not be dis-
 turbed on appeal. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine
 how the trial judge could have proceeded differently,
 given that the winter services agreement was never
 performed and that we therefore cannot say with
 certainty what Callow’s expenses would have been.

B. “Abuse of Right”, “Wrongful Exercise of a
   Right”, and Comparative Analysis of Good
   Faith in the Law of Contract

[152] With the exception of my discussion regarding
 damages, most of the foregoing is consistent, or
at least not inconsistent, with the majority’s reasons,
and is sufficient to dispose of this appeal. But while
acknowledging this (at para. 44: “ . . . the duty to act
honestly about matters directly linked to the performance
 of the contract . . . is sufficient to dispose of
991
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


this appeal”; “[n]o expansion of the law set forth in
Bhasin is necessary to find in favour of Callow”), the
majority nonetheless proceeds to delve into matters
beyond the duty to act honestly. And in so doing, it
does indeed expand upon (and, I say, confuse) the
law set forth in Bhasin.

[153] More particularly, the majority says that this
appeal presents an opportunity to resolve two issues:
first, “what constitutes a breach of the duty of honest
performance where it manifests itself in connection
with the exercise of a seemingly unfettered, unilateral
 termination clause” (para. 30); and secondly,
“when dishonesty is directly linked to the performance
 of a contract” (para. 64). These questions
lead the majority to focus on whether the exercise
of the termination provision was itself dishonest. It
explains:

. . . the duty of honesty as contractual doctrine has a limiting
 function on the exercise of an otherwise complete and
clear right . . . . This means, simply, that instead of constraining
 the decision to terminate in and of itself, the duty
of honest performance attracts damages where the manner
in which the right was exercised was dishonest. [para. 53]

The majority finds support for this approach in
Quebec civil law. Specifically, it contends that the
“required direct link between dishonesty and performance
” is “made plain” by considering “how the
framework for abuse of rights in Quebec connects the
manner in which a contractual right is exercised to
the requirements of good faith” (para. 67). It states
that arts. 6, 7 and 1375 of the Civil Code of Québec
“point to this connection by providing that no contractual
 right may be exercised abusively without
violating the requirements of good faith” (para. 67).

[154] Both as a substantive and methodological
 matter, I cannot endorse this. First, in the
992


circumstances of this particular appeal, the majority
’s resort to the civil law as a “source of inspiration
” (para. 60) is inappropriate. As the majority
acknowledges, the issues to which its analysis responds
 are fully addressed by Bhasin itself, and there
is no indication that the principles outlined therein
require further elaboration. Secondly, and relatedly,
the majority’s focus on the wrongful exercise of a
right distorts the analysis mandated by Bhasin and
undermines the independent character of the various
common law good faith duties identified therein.

  (1) Comparative Analysis

[155] The majority draws on the civilian concept
of abuse of rights “as a framework to understand the
common law duty of honest performance” (para. 73).
Specifically, it finds that this framework “helps to
focus the analysis of whether the common law duty
of honest performance has been breached on what
might be called the wrongful exercise of a contractual
 right” (para. 63).

[156] In considering the utility of the comparative
exercise that the majority proposes, it must be borne
in mind that the common law principles applicable
to this appeal are both determinative and settled.
Drawing from civil law in these circumstances departs
 from this Court’s accepted practice in respect of
comparative legal analysis. Rather than permissibly
drawing inspiration or comfort from the civil law in
filling a gap in the common law or in modifying it,
the majority’s approach, I say respectfully, risks sub-
suming the common law’s already-established and
distinct conception of good faith into the civil law’s
conception. And to the extent it does so, it confuses
matters significantly, the majority’s assurances to the
contrary notwithstanding.

[157] As Moldaver J. observed (in dissent, but not
on this point) in Reference re Supreme Court Act,
ss. 5 and 6, 2014 SCC 21, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 433, at
para. 113 (emphasis added), “[t]he coexistence of
993
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


two distinct legal systems in Canada — the civil
law system in Quebec and the common law system
elsewhere — is a unique and defining characteris-
tic of our country.” The distinct common law and
civil law traditions represent an integral component
of Canadian legal heritage and identity (Hon. M.
Bastarache, “Bijuralism in Canada”, in Bijuralism
and Harmonization: Genesis (2001), at p. 26; see
also M. Samson, “Le droit civil québécois: exemple
d’un droit à porosité variable” (2018-19), 50 Ottawa
L. Rev. 257, at p. 257).

[158] Preserving this unique aspect of Canada’s
identity requires maintaining the distinct features
of both the common law and civil law traditions.
Indeed, this Court has gone so far as to describe its
own composition as having been designed to ensure
 “that the common law and the civil law would
evolve side by side, while each maintained its distinctive
 character” (Reference re Supreme Court Act,
at para. 85 (emphasis added)). It follows that, just as
this Court decided in Reference re Supreme Court
Act that the presence on this Court of at least three
judges from Quebec “ensur[es] civil law expertise
and the representation of Quebec’s legal traditions”,
the integrity and distinct character of the common
law is also ensured by the presence of judges from
Canada’s common law jurisdictions.

[159] It also follows from the distinct nature of
Canada’s two legal traditions that drawing from one
tradition to influence the other is simply an exercise
in comparative legal analysis (Caisse populaire des
Deux Rives v. Société mutuelle d’assurance contre
l’incendie de la Vallée du Richelieu, [1990] 2 S.C.R.
995, at p. 1016). As I have already recounted, this is
what the majority claims it is doing here. But while
comparison is an important tool, its uses are not
unlimited. In particular, comparative analysis, in the
sense of using law from another legal system to elu-
cidate or develop the domestic legal system, is generally
 appropriate only where domestic law does not
provide an answer to the problem facing the court, or
994


where it is necessary to otherwise develop that law.
Using law from other systems in other circumstances
would either be superfluous, or would (to the extent
of its use) have the undesirable effect of displacing
established domestic jurisprudence (J.-L. Baudouin,
“L’interprétation du Code civil québécois par la Cour
suprême du Canada” (1975), 53 Can. Bar Rev. 715,
at pp. 725-27; see also K. Zweigert and H. Kötz,
Introduction to Comparative Law (3rd rev. ed. 1998),
at pp. 17-18; T. Lundmark, Charting the Divide between
 Common and Civil Law (2012), at pp. 8-10).
As Justice Sharpe writes extra-judicially about the
use of authority generally, which applies equally
to comparative legal analysis, “[i]t is only where
the case cannot readily be decided on the basis of
binding authority that non-binding sources will have
a material effect on the decision” (Good Judgment:
Making Judicial Decisions (2018), at p. 171).

[160] These sources are not expressions of juris-
dictional chauvinism. Rather, they express a posture
of prudence and disciplined restraint in the deploy-
ment of comparative analysis in judgments. And
for good reason. Seeking inspiration from external
sources when it is unnecessary to do so may simply
complicate a straightforward subject, thereby intro-
ducing uncertainty to a previously settled area of law
(Gilles E. Néron Communication Marketing Inc. v.
Chambre des notaires du Québec, 2004 SCC 53,
[2004] 3 S.C.R. 95, at para. 56, citing J.-L. Baudouin
and P. Deslauriers, La responsabilité civile (6th ed.
2003), at p. 193). Even something as seemingly
innocuous as changing the terminology used to
describe a concept — for example, the majority’s
reliance on the civil law device of abuse of right and
references to the wrongful exercise of a right — can
have substantive legal implications, affecting the coherence
 and stability of the resulting modified legal
system. Language itself, after all, plays “a crucial
role in the evolution of the law” (Bastarache, at p. 20;
see also Lundmark, at pp. 74-86).
995
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


[161] This is not mere conjecture. The seemingly
benign injection of civil law terminology into common
 law judgments has previously generated precisely
 that kind of instability. Substantial confusion
in the common law of unjust enrichment arose in
Canada in the 1970s from the introduction of civil
law terminology of “absence of juristic reasons for
an enrichment” as if it were synonymous with the traditional
 requirement of “unjust factors” that had been
“deeply ingrained” since Lord Mansfield’s judgment
in Moses v. Macferlan (1760), 2 Burr. 1005, 97 E.R.
676 (M. McInnes, “The Reason to Reverse: Unjust
Factors and Juristic Reasons” (2012), 92 B.U.L. Rev.
1049, at pp. 1052 and 1054). As Professor McInnes
explains:

    . . . without discussion or explanation, the Supreme
Court of Canada began to use the civilian terminology
(i.e., “absence of juristic reason for the enrichment”)
while continuing to apply the traditional unjust factors.
Predictably, the Canadian law of unjust enrichment grew
ever more confused as the court said one thing and did
another. [Footnotes omitted; p. 1056.]

[162] The result was, to put it mildly, destabilizing.
And predictably so. While Western legal systems are
called upon to address the same kinds of disputes,
each has developed different ways over the centuries
to resolve them. The result is like two massive jigsaw
puzzles that cover the same amount of ground. From
a distance, each looks much the same as the other,
but up close, it becomes apparent that the pieces
are cut differently so that pieces from one cannot fit
(or at least fit easily) into the other. And so it was
when “juristic reasons” began to be spoken of in
the Canadian common law of unjust enrichment.
Conflicting lines of authorities continued to apply the
common law requirement of unjust factors, while in
other decisions courts ascribed legal significance to
the introduction of civilian language — that is, they
“took the civilian language at face value and ordered
restoration when defendants could not justify the
retention of their enrichments” (McInnes, at p. 1056
996


(footnote omitted)). In the end, this Court had to set-
tle the question in Garland v. Consumers’ Gas Co.,
2004 SCC 25, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 629, which it did by
clarifying that the civilian terminology of “juristic
reasons” applies. But coming even several decades
after the uncertainty arose, we must acknowledge
that this confirmation of the civil law terminological
shift itself also effected substantive instability in the
administration of the common law:

In a stroke, lawyers and judges were required to alter
fundamentally their conception of injustice. Liability now
responds to the absence of any reason for the defendant’s
retention, rather than to the presence of some reason for
the plaintiff’s recovery. The transition has not been seam-
less, and it will be many years before practice settles into
the level of consistency and certainty that litigants have
the right to expect from a mature system of law. [Emphasis
in original.]

(McInnes, at p. 1057)

[163] This is not to suggest that Garland is wrongly
decided, or that its authority in the common law of
unjust enrichment is somehow undermined by its
civilian inclination. Rather, it is simply to point out
that there can be a heavy price to pay — typically,
by unijural lawyers and their clients — when external
 legal concepts are introduced via a judgment on
a purely domestic legal issue. Hence the restraint
which this Court has (until now) shown, by intro-
ducing external legal concepts to a judgment only
where it is necessary to do so — that is, to fill a gap
where domestic law does not provide an answer, or
where it is necessary to modify or otherwise develop
an existing legal rule. In such circumstances, other
legal systems may well reveal potential solutions
that would not have been apparent from a narrow
domestic focus (Zweigert and Kötz, at pp. 17-20; see
997
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


also Canadian National Railway Co. v. Norsk Pacific
Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021, at pp. 1140-47
(per McLachlin J., as she then was)). This is what we
mean when we say that Canada’s two legal systems
can serve as sources of “inspiration” (Bou Malhab
v. Diffusion Métromédia CMR inc., 2011 SCC 9,
[2011] 1 S.C.R. 214, at para. 38).

[164] We can also draw on the experience of other
legal systems to assist our deliberations about whether
an identified potential solution to a legal problem
will result in negative consequences. Indeed, that was
the limited use this Court made of Quebec law (and,
for that matter, U.S. law) in Bhasin, at paras. 83-85,
Saadati v. Moorhead, 2017 SCC 28, [2017] 1 S.C.R.
543, at para. 34, and Norsk, at pp. 1174-75 (per
Stevenson J., concurring). Similarly, this Court will
sometimes observe that a legal concept developed
within one system, using domestic sources, mirrors a
concept found in another system (Deloitte & Touche
v. Livent Inc. (Receiver of), 2017 SCC 63, [2017] 2
S.C.R. 855, at para. 138 (per McLachlin C.J., dissenting
 in part); Kingstreet Investments Ltd. v. New
Brunswick (Finance), 2007 SCC 1, [2007] 1 S.C.R.
3, at para. 41; St. Lawrence Cement Inc. v. Barrette,
2008 SCC 64, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 392, at paras. 76-79;
see also Sport Maska Inc. v. Zittrer, [1988] 1 S.C.R.
564, at p. 570 (per Beetz J., concurring)). When used
in these ways, comparative sources are relied on to
provide comfort that other legal systems have arrived
at similar conclusions.

[165] But that is not this case. Here, no gaps are
to be filled, and no domestic common law requires
development (or even “clarification”). Rather, in
service of what the majority describes as a “dialogue
” between the civil law and common law, it
uses the civil law device of abuse of right to drive
998


an analysis which, I repeat, is neither necessary to
decide this appeal, nor helpful in its obscuring of
the law. Further, this case engages an issue — the
place of good faith in contract law — on which the
Canadian common law and civil law systems have
adopted very different approaches — each autono-
mous, and neither inherently superior to the other
(see, generally, R. Jukier, “Good Faith in Contract:
A Judicial Dialogue Between Common Law Canada
and Québec” (2019), 1 Journal of Commonwealth
Law 83). As the Hon. Louis LeBel observed:

   [translation] The fact that the Court has maintained
the specificity of the two legal traditions with respect to
good faith shows the importance it attaches to respect for
their conceptual autonomy. The dialogue between the
two systems remains circumscribed by a judicial stance
that, in general today, understands the importance and
characteristics of the major legal traditions that make up
Canadian bijuralism.

(“Les cultures de la Cour suprême du Canada: vers
l’émergence d’une culture dialogique?”, in J.-F.
Gaudreault-DesBiens et al., eds., Convergence, concurrence
 et harmonisation des systèmes juridiques
(2009), 1, at p. 15)

[166] Indeed, there are principled reasons for
the distinct treatment of good faith as between the
common law and civil law systems. As Professor
Valcke observes, the common law also relies on
other concepts, including the equitable doctrine
of estoppel, to achieve similar outcomes as the
doctrine of good faith (“Bhasin v Hrynew: Why
a General Duty of Good Faith Would Be Out of
Place in English Canadian Contract Law” (2019),
1 Journal of Commonwealth Law 65, at p. 77). At a
more general level, the common law and civil law are
premised on different understandings of legal rights
(H. Dedek, “From Norms to Facts: The Realization
of Rights in Common and Civil Private Law” (2010),
56 McGill L.J. 77, at pp. 79-81) and of the role of the
state in mitigating the effects of harsh bargains (M.
Pargendler, “The Role of the State in Contract Law:
999
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


The Common-Civil Law Divide” (2018), 43 Yale J.
Intl L. 143, at p. 179).

[167] I acknowledge that the majority refers to
“special reasons” to be “cautious in undertaking
the comparative exercise to which Callow invites us
here” (para. 70). But — and, again I stress, in an area
of common law that admits of no lacuna or gap that
needs filling, or that is in need of development — by
applying the civilian doctrine of “abuse of right” as it
does, caution is thrown to the wind, the independent
character of the existing good faith doctrine, which
Bhasin carefully preserved, is undermined, and the
generally applicable rule that this Court rejected in
Bhasin is at least implicitly embraced.

[168] To be clear, the majority’s comparative methodology
 is not mere surplusage. Rather, its application
 is the only point of the exercise. As I have already
recounted, the doctrine of abuse of rights is applied
“to focus the analysis of whether the common law
duty of honest performance has been breached on
what might be called the wrongful exercise of a contractual
 right” (para. 63). Quebec civil law is cited
as authority for the proposition that “no contractual
right may be exercised abusively” (para. 67). This
leads to another reason why comparative methodology
 is undesirable in this case, which requires me
to speak plainly. The passages I have just cited from
the majority’s reasons, and indeed the very notion of
“abuse of right”, would not be familiar, meaningful
or even comprehensible to the vast majority of common
 law lawyers and judges. And yet, many of them
would reasonably assume — as many did when the
language of “juristic reasons” entered the common
law lexicon of unjust enrichment — that there is legal
 significance in their use here, and that they must
therefore familiarize themselves with these concepts
or retain bijural assistance in order to competently
represent their clients or adjudicate their cases. At
the very least, common law lawyers applying the
common law concepts under discussion here will
presumably need to have an eye, as the majority
1000


does, to the Civil Code of Québec. How they would
acquire the necessary familiarity, and the extent to
which they must acquire it, is left unexplained.

[169] These are not idle concerns, and on this point
there is a certain reality that we must bear in mind.
Few common law lawyers and judges in most provinces
 are sufficiently versed in French to read the
sources of civil law concerning the abuse of right.
And of those who are, fewer still will be trained in
the civil law so as to understand their substance.

[170] I confess that I am in no position to express
a view on the correctness of the majority’s procla-
mation that it, or this Court, is pursuing a “dialogue”
between the civil and common legal systems. Indeed,
it is not obvious to me what having such a “dialogue”
means in the context of discharging our adjudicative
responsibilities. But accepting that my colleagues
understand themselves to be so engaged, I suggest
with utmost respect that their dialogical pursuit
should not occur at the expense of those who must
know, understand and apply an aspect of one of those
legal systems that the majority now renders opaque.
It really comes down to this: the majority’s unnecessary
 digression into external legal concepts will
create practical difficulties on the ground by making
the common law governing contractual relationships
less comprehensible and therefore less accessible to
those who need to know it, thereby increasing costs
for all concerned. At a time when many are striving
to remove old barriers that impede access to justice,
I would not erect new barriers in the form of legal
expression that bears little to no resemblance to the
training and experience of those who help citizens
navigate the legal system.
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


[171] Even where a comparative analysis is appropriate
, the analogy of the jigsaw puzzles must
be borne in mind. It is simply not the case that “the
common law and the civil law represent . . . distinctive
 ways of knowing the law” (Kasirer J.’s reasons,
at para. 71 (emphasis added)). They are not different
theories of law. They are different systems of law.
And because legal rules must originate from the system
 within which that rule will operate, comparative
analysis must be undertaken with care and circumspection
. This Court’s statement in Caisse populaire
des Deux Rives, at p. 1004, is apposite:

     . . . apparent similarity of the fundamental rules
should not cause us to forget that the courts have a duty
to ensure that insurance law develops in a manner consistent
 with the rest of Quebec civil law, of which it forms a
part. Accordingly, while the judgments of foreign jurisdictions
, in particular Britain, the United States and France,
may be of interest when the law there is based on similar
principles, the fact remains that Quebec civil law is rooted
in concepts peculiar to it, and while it may be necessary
to refer to foreign law in some cases, the courts should
only adopt what is consistent with the general scheme of
Quebec law. [Emphasis added.]

[172] The direction that civil law developments
must be consistent with the overall civil law of
Quebec applies with equal force when considering
 potential modifications to the common law.
Maintaining the distinct character of each of
Canada’s legal traditions requires administering each
system according to its own scheme of rules, and by
reference to its own authorities (Colonial Real Estate
Co. v. La Communauté des Soeurs de la Charité de
l’Hôpital Général de Montréal (1918), 57 S.C.R.
585, at p. 603; see also J. Dainow, “The Civil Law
and the Common Law: Some Points of Comparison”
(1967), 15 Am. J. Comp. L. 419, at pp. 434-35). It
follows that any enrichment from another legal system
 must be incorporated only insofar as it conforms
to the internal structure and organizing principles of
the adopting legal system (F. Allard, The Supreme
Court of Canada and its Impact on the Expression
of Bijuralism (2001), at p. 9). Ultimately, the golden
rule in using concepts from one of Canada’s legal
1002


systems to modify the other is that the proposed
solution must be able to completely and coherently
 integrate into the adopting system’s structure
(J.-L. Baudouin, “Mixed Jurisdictions: A Model for
the XXIst Century?” (2003), 63 La. L. Rev. 983, at
pp. 990-91).

[173] This is of practical concern here. Analytically
jamming the civilian concept of abuse of right regarding
 the termination of a contract into the common
 law is not the tidy and discrete affair that the
majority appears to suppose. This is because the
obligation of good faith in civil law imposes more
onerous duties on the party terminating the contract
than it does at common law. The Quebec Court of
Appeal has explained the notion of abuse of right
in the context of termination of a contract in the
following way:

[translation] Up until now, the courts have sometimes
sanctioned abuse of right in cases of malice. However,
they have also sanctioned unilateral resiliation by a dis-
tributor for reasons found not to be within the spirit of
the discretionary resiliation clause, or where the resiliation
 was improper, that is, without any valid reason, or
without prior notice or without any sign of what was to
come. These cases clearly illustrate the “moralization” of
contractual relations by the doctrine of abuse of right: for
it is not enough to resiliate a contract in a strictly lawful
manner (in accordance with the language of a resiliation
clause), it is also necessary to do so in a legitimate way.
[Emphasis added.]

(Birdair inc. v. Danny’s Construction Co., 2013
QCCA 580, at para. 131 (CanLII), citing J.-L.
Baudouin and P.-G. Jobin, Les obligations (6th
ed. 2005), by P.-G. Jobin with the collaboration of
N. Vézina, at para. 125.)

[174] Even if we were to imagine that it was the
exercise of the termination clause that led in this
case to the breach of duty of honest contractual performance
 — which, as I shall explain below, it was
not — Bhasin stipulates clearly that there is no duty
to disclose information or intentions relevant to termination
 that flows from the common law duty of
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


good faith. But under the civilian doctrine invoked
by the majority, terminating a contract without disclosing
 intentions can constitute an abuse of right.
While the majority acknowledges that it “do[es] not
rely on the civil law here for the specific rules that
would govern a similar claim in Quebec” (para. 73),
this tends to affirm how inappropriate its comparative
analysis is here. The majority either relies on a trun-
cated and therefore distorted version of the civilian
framework of abuse of right, or else opens the door
to future “clarifications” (which would further undermine
 the integrity of the common law duty of honest
performance as stated in Bhasin). Even on its own
terms, then, the majority’s invocation of abuse of
right raises more questions than it claims to answer.

[175] For all these reasons, I am of the respectful
view that it is not appropriate to refer to, and rely
upon, the doctrine of abuse of right in this case. This
appeal calls upon this Court to straightforwardly
apply the duty of honest performance, and nothing
more. Transplanting the doctrine of abuse of right
into the common law context is not only unnecessary
 here, doing so without reference to the broader
context in which good faith operates in the common
law will cause significant uncertainty.

  (2) The Wrongful Exercise of a Right

[176] The majority’s reliance on the civilian doctrine
 of abuse of a right leads me to a final, substantive
 criticism: in focusing on the wrongful exercise
of a right, it distorts the analysis described in Bhasin
and elides the distinction between honest performance
 and good faith in the exercise of a contractual
discretion.

[177] The gravamen of a claim in honest performance
 is that a party made dishonest representations
concerning contractual performance that caused its
counterparty to suffer loss. It is not that a right was
exercised in a way that was wrongful, abusive, or
1004


even dishonest. Here, for example, the complaint
hinges on Baycrest’s deceptive conduct preceding
the exercise of the termination clause. By relying
on Baycrest’s misleading representations, Callow
missed the opportunity to bid on other contracts.
The exercise of the termination clause is relevant
only in the sense that it was the subject of the misrepresentation
.

[178] I recognize that, in Bhasin, Cromwell J.
stated that the defendant breached the duty of honest
 performance when it “failed to act honestly with
[the plaintiff] in exercising the non-renewal clause”
(para. 103). This phrasing, however, mirrored the trial
judge’s finding that the defendant “acted dishonestly
toward Bhasin in exercising the non-renewal clause”
(Bhasin v. Hrynew, 2011 ABQB 637, 526 A.R. 1, at
para. 261, quoted in Bhasin, at para. 94). Elsewhere,
Cromwell J. is clear that the breach “consisted of [the
defendant’s] failure to be honest with [the plaintiff]
about its contractual performance and, in particular,
with respect to its settled intentions with respect
to renewal” (para. 108). This reflects the general
framework that he describes, i.e., that the duty of
honest performance “is a simple requirement not to
lie or mislead the other party about one’s contractual
performance” (para. 73).

[179] Maintaining analytical clarity about the
source of the breach — the dishonesty that preceded
the termination, and not the termination itself — is
important for two reasons. First, a breach of the
duty of honest performance may arise from many
aspects of performance. The general rule enunciated
in Bhasin provides a clear standard that can be applied
 across different contexts, including to the facts
of this appeal. There is no benefit in developing a
separate analysis that responds narrowly to dishonesty
 concerning the exercise of a contractual right.
Doing so will only make the law more confused and
difficult to apply.
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


[180] Secondly, the source of the breach distin-
guishes the duty of honest performance from the duty
to exercise contractual discretion in good faith. As
discussed above, where a breach of the latter duty is
alleged, the focus of the analysis is whether the defendant
 was entitled to exercise its discretion in the
way that it did. By shifting the focus of the honest
performance analysis to the manner in which a right
was exercised, the majority blurs the boundaries
between these two distinct duties. Indeed, it contends
 that “the duty of honest performance shares a
common methodology with the duty to exercise contractual
 discretionary powers in good faith by fixing,
at least in circumstances like ours, on the wrongful
exercise of a contractual prerogative” (para. 51).

[181] We are bound by Bhasin to treat the duty of
honest performance as conceptually distinct from the
duty to exercise discretionary powers in good faith
(Atlantic Lottery Corp. Inc. v. Babstock, 2020 SCC
19, [2020] 2 S.C.R. 420, at para. 65). This is not
simply a matter of stare decisis and incremental legal
development (although it is at least those things);
there is also the practical concern that blurred and
ambiguous treatment of these two duties has a meaningful
 impact on the outcome for contracting parties.
Contrary to the majority’s suggestion, the wrong at
issue in each category of cases is distinct, and the
damages available differ accordingly. The award for
a breach of the duty of honest performance addresses
the effect of the dishonesty. In contrast, the award for
a breach of the duty to exercise discretion in good
faith addresses the effect of the exercise of discretion
itself. Placing both duties under the umbrella of the
“wrongful exercise of a contractual right” obscures
these distinctions and thus represents an unfortunate
departure from Bhasin.
1006


IV. Conclusion

[182] I would allow the appeal, set aside the Court
of Appeal decision, and reinstate the judgment of
the trial judge with costs in this Court and the courts
below. Côté J.

     The following are the reasons delivered by

[183] Côté J. (dissenting) — What constitutes
actively misleading conduct in the context of a contractual
 right to terminate without cause? Where
should the line be drawn between active dishonesty
 and permissible non-disclosure of information
relevant to termination? Does a party to a contract
have an obligation to dissuade his counterparty from
entertaining hopes regarding the duration of their
business relationship? These are the questions raised
by this appeal.

[184] In this case, the respondents (“Baycrest”)
bargained for a right to terminate at any time and
for any other reason than unsatisfactory services
upon giving 10 days’ notice. Baycrest made the
decision to terminate, but it chose to wait before
sending the notice, as it did not want to jeopardize
 the performance of other work that was being
done by the appellant (“Callow”, referring inter-
changeably to C.M. Callow Inc. and to its principal,
Mr. Christopher Callow). In the meantime, Baycrest
became aware that its counterparty was entertaining
hopes of a renewal, although it did not say or do
anything that materially contributed to those hopes.
Baycrest did nothing to discourage them; such conduct
 may not be laudable, but it does not fall within
the category of “active dishonesty” prohibited by the
contractual duty of honest performance.

I.

[185] Both of my colleagues seem to agree on the
following propositions.
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


[186] First, this case concerns solely the duty of
honest performance and not the duty to exercise
discretionary powers in good faith (these two duties
were distinguished in Bhasin v. Hrynew, 2014 SCC
71, [2014] 3 S.C.R. 494, at paras. 47, 50 and 72-73).

[187] Second, the duty of honest performance
“means simply that parties must not lie or otherwise
knowingly mislead each other about matters directly
linked to the performance of the contract” (Bhasin,
at para. 73).

[188] Third, there is no duty to disclose information
 or one’s intentions with respect to termination
(Bhasin, at paras. 73 and 87).

[189] Fourth, there is no need to extend the law
by recognizing a new duty of good faith relating to
“active non-disclosure”.

[190] I take it we all agree with these premises.
Therefore, the issue, when properly framed, bears on
the distinction referred to in Bhasin (at paras. 73 and
86-87) between actively misleading conduct and permissible
 non-disclosure. In the context of this case
it comes down to this: did Baycrest lie or otherwise
knowingly mislead Callow into thinking that there
was no risk it would exercise its right to terminate the
winter agreement for any other reason than unsatisfactory
 services? The answer to this question is no.

[191] Before turning to my analysis, I wish to
express my substantial agreement with Justice
 Brown’s observations insofar as they pertain to the
 role of external legal concepts. Justice Kasirer states
 at para. 44 of his reasons that “[n]o expansion of
 the law set forth in Bhasin is necessary” to dispose
 of this appeal. However, he then embarks on, and I
 say this respectfully, an unnecessary comparative
 exercise between the civil law and the common law
 under the pretext of “dialogue”. I am perplexed by
 the virtues of “dialogue” in a case like this one where
1008


no gaps in the common law need to be filled and
no rules need to be modified. I do not see why we
should adopt such an approach, one that provides
no palpable benefits and that is also arbitrary and
unpredictable.

[192] That being said, I believe that the common
law as it now stands does not support the result my
colleagues arrive at. I am afraid that the unnecessary
debate about comparative legal exercises may have
diverted attention from the facts of this case as they
are.

II. Ambit of the Duty of Honest Performance

A. Context in Which the Duty Was Created

[193] In Bhasin, the Court unanimously introduced
the contractual duty of honest performance as a “new
common law duty under the broad umbrella of the
organizing principle of good faith performance of
 contracts” (para. 72). Cromwell J. stressed that this
 was no more than a “modest, incremental step”
 (para. 73; see also paras. 82 and 89), with the duty
 of honest performance being a “minimum standard”
 (para. 74).

[194] In Cromwell J.’ opinion, the new duty would
“interfer[e] very little with freedom of contract”
(para. 76); so little that he thought such interference
would be “more theoretical than real” (para. 81). On
the subject of the organizing principle of good faith
from which it grew, Cromwell J. stated:

    The principle of good faith must be applied in a manner
that is consistent with the fundamental commitments of
the common law of contract which generally places great
weight on the freedom of contracting parties to pursue their
individual self-interest. In commerce, a party may sometimes
 cause loss to another — even intentionally — in the
legitimate pursuit of economic self-interest . . . . The development
 of the principle of good faith must be clear not
to veer into a form of ad hoc judicial moralism or “palm
tree” justice. In particular, the organizing principle of good
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


faith should not be used as a pretext for scrutinizing the
motives of contracting parties. [para. 70]

[195] Cromwell J. also expressed specific concerns
relating to the clarity of the duty, its effect on commercial
 certainty and other practical implications
(at paras. 59, 66, 70-71, 73, 79-80 and 86-87). He
endeavoured to explain what the new duty was not:

   The duty of honest performance that I propose should
not be confused with a duty of disclosure or of fiduciary
 loyalty. A party to a contract has no general duty to
subordinate his or her interest to that of the other party.
[Emphasis added; para. 86.]


[196] Turning to a positive description, he stressed
that the duty of honest performance was a “simple
requirement” not to lie or knowingly mislead about
matters directly linked to performance of the contract
(para. 73).

[197] The requirement that parties not lie is
straightforward. But what kind of conduct is covered
 by the requirement that they not otherwise
knowingly mislead each other? Absent a duty to
disclose, it is far from obvious when exactly one’s
silence will “knowingly mislead” the other contracting
 party. Are we to draw sophisticated distinctions
between “mere silence” and other types of silence,
as Brown J. suggests? If that be so, I wonder how a
contracting party — on whom, I note, the law imposes
 neither “a duty of loyalty or of disclosure” nor
a requirement “to forego advantages flowing from
the contract” (Bhasin, at para. 73) — is supposed
to know at what point a permissible silence turns
into a non-permissible silence that may constitute a
breach of contract. With the greatest respect, I do not
believe such casuistry is compatible with the “simple
requirement” Cromwell J. meant to set out in Bhasin.
1010


[198] As Cromwell J. put it, “a clear distinction can
be drawn between a failure to disclose a material fact,
even a firm intention to end the contractual arrangement
, and active dishonesty” (para. 86 (emphasis
added)). He added that “United Roasters makes it
clear that there is no unilateral duty to disclose information
 relevant to termination. But the situation is
quite different, as I see it, when it comes to actively
misleading or deceiving the other contracting party
in relation to performance of the contract” (para. 87
(emphasis added)). These words should be taken at
face value. The duty of honest performance should
remain “clear and easy to apply” (para. 80).

B. Permissible Non-disclosure

[199] It must be borne in mind that all obligations
flowing from the duty of honest performance are
“negative” obligations (P. Daly, “La bonne foi et la
common law: l’arrêt Bhasin c. Hrynew”, in J. Torres-
Ceyte, G.-A. Berthold and C.-A. M. Péladeau, eds.,
Le dialogue en droit civil (2018), 89, at pp. 101-2; see
also Kasirer J.’s reasons, at para. 86). Extending the
duty beyond that scope would “detract from . . . certainty
 in commercial dealings” (Bhasin, at para. 80).

[200] Therefore, silence cannot be considered dishonest
 within the meaning of Bhasin unless there is
a positive obligation to speak. Such an obligation
does not arise simply because a party to a contract
realizes that his counterparty is operating under a
mistaken belief.

[201] Absent a duty of disclosure, that is, absent
any kind of free-standing positive obligation flowing
 from the duty of honest performance, a party
to a contract has no obligation to correct his counterparty
’s mistaken belief unless the party’s active
conduct has materially contributed to it (see, in a different
 context, T. Buckwold, “The Enforceability of
Agreements to Negotiate in Good Faith: The Impact
of Bhasin v. Hrynew and the Organizing Principle
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


of Good Faith in Common Law Canada” (2016), 58
Can. Bus. L.J. 1, at pp. 12-13).

[202] What constitutes a material contribution will
obviously depend upon the context, which includes
the nature of the parties’ relationship (see Brown J.’s
reasons, at para. 133) as well as the relevant provisions
 of the contract. But the reason underlying this
requirement is a practical one that is consistent with
Bhasin’s emphasis on commercial expectations (at
paras. 1, 34, 41, 60 and 62): parties that prefer not to
disclose certain information — which they are entitled
 not to do — are not required to adopt a new line
of conduct in their contractual relationship simply
because they chose silence over speech.

[203] It cannot be that the law, on the one hand,
allows contracting parties not to disclose information
but, on the other hand, negates that possibility by
imposing a standard of conduct that is at odds with
the spontaneous attitudes — such as evasiveness
and equivocation — parties might have when their
conversations bear precisely on what they wish not
to disclose.

[204] Even though parties who make that choice
must be careful with what they say or do, especially
if they become aware that their counterparties are
operating under a mistaken belief, they should not
be asked to behave as if their actions were being
scrutinized under a microscope to determine whether
they have contributed to that mistaken belief. Such a
requirement would be unacceptable.

[205] In the context of a right to terminate a contract
 without cause, a party that intends to end an
agreement does not have to convey hints in order to
alert his counterparty that their business relationship
is in danger. No duty of disclosure should mean no
duty of disclosure.
1012


[206] A party’s awareness of his counterparty’s
mistaken belief will therefore not, in itself, trigger an
obligation to speak unless the party has taken positive
 action that materially contributed to that belief.
The active conduct and the mistaken belief must
both pertain to contractual performance; otherwise,
it could hardly be said that one has “knowingly misle
[d] [the] other about matters directly linked to the
performance of the contract” (Bhasin, at para. 73).

[207] In sum, the “minimum standard” of honesty
imposed by the duty of honest performance has to be
consistent with the other principles set out in Bhasin.
It also has to be realistic and not overly formalistic.
Absent a duty of disclosure, a party has no obligation
 to dissuade his counterparty from persisting in
a mistaken belief. This does not mean that the party
may induce or reinforce such a belief by significant
positive actions or representations. There is an obligation
 to correct this mistaken belief if the party’s
active conduct has materially contributed to it.

III. Analysis

[208] Callow and Baycrest entered into two
two-year contracts: a winter agreement covering
mostly snow removal services for the period from
November 1, 2012 to April 30, 2014 and a summer
maintenance services agreement for the period from
May 1, 2012 to October 31, 2013. The winter agreement
, which is at issue here, contained the following
provision:


9. If the Contractor [i.e. Callow] fails to give satisfactory
service to the Corporation [i.e. Baycrest] in accordance
with the terms of this Agreement and the specifications and
general conditions attached hereto or if for any other reason
 the Contractor’s services are no longer required for the
whole or part of the property covered by this Agreement,
then the Corporation may terminate this contract upon giving
 ten (10) days’ notice in writing to the Contractor, and
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


upon such termination, all obligations of the Contractor
shall cease and the Corporation shall pay to the Contractor
any monies due to it up to the date of such terminations.
[Emphasis added.]

(A.R., vol. III, at p. 10)

[209] In March or April 2013, Baycrest decided
 to terminate the winter agreement. On
September 12, 2013, it gave Callow 10 days’ notice
that it was terminating the contract. In the meantime,
Baycrest had learned that Callow was performing
free extra landscaping work and that he was under
 the impression the winter agreement would not
be terminated (trial reasons, 2017 ONSC 7095, at
para. 48 (CanLII)).

[210] It can easily be understood from these circumstances
 that Callow was “shocked” by the termination
. Callow believed that, “if there was a problem,
he would have expected [Baycrest] to bring it to his
attention like [it] had done in the past” (trial reasons,
at para. 49). Baycrest’s behaviour was certainly dis-
courteous and cavalier. Yet, that is not the question
here. The question is whether Baycrest materially
contributed to Callow’s mistaken belief that the contract
 would not be terminated. If Baycrest did, then
it had an obligation to correct that mistaken belief
in accordance with its duty of honest performance.
Otherwise, it had no obligation to disclose anything.

[211] Before our Court, Callow acknowledged that
by entering into the winter agreement, he had taken
the risk that Baycrest “may terminate [the contract],
but only disclose the termination decision on 10
days’ written notice” (transcript, at p. 11; see also
C.A. reasons, 2018 ONCA 896, 429 D.L.R. (4th)
704, at para. 14). I am of the view that according to
the terms of the winter agreement, Callow could have
found himself in the exact same situation regardless
of Baycrest’s behaviour during the spring and summer
 of 2013. Such a possibility was in fact inherent
in the contract he had bargained for.
1014


[212] Callow essentially submits that Baycrest’s
active conduct led him to believe that the winter
agreement was no longer at risk of being terminated
despite the clear wording of the termination provision
. He stresses the following points:
(1) Baycrest deliberately kept its decision secret
    because it did not want to jeopardize the performance
     of the summer agreement;
(2) Baycrest showed satisfaction with Callow’s
    services;
(3) Callow had discussions with Mr. Peixoto and
    Mr. Campbell regarding the renewal of the
    winter agreement;
(4) Baycrest accepted Callow’s “freebie” work; and
(5) Baycrest was aware of Callow’s mistaken belief.

[213]

[214] The trial judge’s understanding of “active
dishonesty” is tainted by an error of law. She did
not consider the principle that, in order to amount
to a breach of the duty of honest performance, any
active dishonesty had to be “directly linked to the
performance of the contract” (Bhasin, at para. 73). In
assessing Baycrest’s conduct, she did not inquire into
whether Baycrest had “lie[d] or otherwise knowingly
misle[d]” Callow about the exercise of its right to
terminate the winter agreement for any other reason
 than unsatisfactory services. This explains why
she wrongly insisted on, amongst other things, the
need to “address the alleged performance issues”
(para. 67) despite the fact that the winter agreement
could be terminated even if Callow’s services were
satisfactory.

[215] Furthermore, although the trial judge seems
to have been aware that there was no duty of disclosure
 (para. 60), she nonetheless found that Baycrest
had acted in bad faith by “withholding the information
 to ensure Callow performed the summer
maintenance services contract” (para. 65; see also
para. 76). She never asked herself whether Baycrest
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


had explicitly or implicitly said or done anything
that could have misled Callow into thinking that the
contract was at no risk of being terminated for any
other reason than unsatisfactory services. It is clear
from reading the trial judge’s reasons as a whole that
the “representations” she found had been made by
Baycrest (at paras. 65, 67 and 76) were not directly
linked to the performance of the winter agreement.
In sum, the trial judge’s misunderstanding of the
applicable legal principles vitiated the fact-finding
process.

[216] Baycrest had bargained for a right to terminate
 its winter agreement for any reason and at
any time upon giving 10 days’ notice. Its duty of
honest performance did not require it to “forego”
this undeniable “advantag[e] flowing from the contract
” (Bhasin, at para. 73). It had no obligation to
tell Callow about its decision to terminate the winter
 agreement until 10 days before the termination
was to take effect, as the contract stipulated. Even
after Baycrest became aware of Callow’s mistaken
belief, it had no obligation to refuse the “freebie”
work Callow was performing on his own initiative
or to correct this mistaken belief he was operating
under. Such an obligation would have arisen only if
Baycrest had contributed materially to that mistaken
belief by inducing it or reinforcing it. In light of
the evidence and the trial judge’s findings, I am not
convinced that Baycrest had done so.

[217] I do not have the same reading as my col-
league Kasirer J. about certain of the trial judge’s
findings of fact (para. 100). These findings expressed
in very broad terms should not be insulated from
the reasons as a whole and from the evidence that
was before the trial judge. For instance, my col-
league writes that “Mr. Peixoto made statements to
Mr. Callow suggesting that a renewal of the winter
maintenance agreement was likely” (para. 95), and
he considers that to be a “key finding” (para. 96).
However, the trial judge’s finding pertained to what
Callow had thought, not to what Baycrest had said
1016


(trial reasons, at para. 41), which is something quite
different. Indeed, as I demonstrate below, the evidence
 supporting this “key finding” shows that
Callow’s thoughts regarding a renewal of the winter
agreement had nothing to do with what Baycrest
said to him.

[218] I now turn to the application of the foregoing
legal principles to the facts of this case.

A. Discussions About Renewal

[219] Callow argues that Baycrest materially
contributed to his mistaken belief by discussing a
possible renewal. Indeed, the renewal issue is central
 in this appeal. It is not disputed that unlike the
contract at issue in Bhasin, the winter agreement
did not contemplate any automatic renewal; it only
contemplated termination. Since renewal was not a
term of the winter agreement, it cannot be considered
“performance of the contract” within the meaning of
Bhasin. For Callow’s claim to succeed, any breach
of the duty of honest performance must pertain to
termination.

[220] Both of my colleagues accept Callow’s submission
 that it can be inferred from the discussions
about renewal that the winter agreement was not in
danger of termination. I would agree with such a
proposition in the following circumstances: if one
party leads another to believe that their contract will
be renewed, it follows that the other party can reasonably
 expect their business relationship to be extended
rather than terminated. But an inference to that effect
cannot be drawn in the abstract. In order to infer
that one party, through discussions about renewal,
led the other party to think that there was no risk
their existing agreement would be terminated, the
inference-drawing process must obviously take into
account the nature of the risk at stake and what was
actually communicated during those discussions.
Otherwise, the inference would entail a palpable and
overriding error that would be subject to appellate
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


review (Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, [2002]
2 S.C.R. 235, at paras. 22-23).

[221] Here, s. 9 of the winter agreement contemplated
 that the agreement might be terminated
(1) for unsatisfactory services, or (2) for any other
reason than unsatisfactory services. Did Baycrest,
by discussing renewal, communicate anything that
might have led Callow to believe there was no risk
the winter agreement would be terminated for any
other reason than unsatisfactory services? The trial
judge described the discussions between the parties
as follows:

    During the spring and summer of 2013, Callow performed
 regular weekly grass cutting, garbage pick-up and
was in discussions with the condominium corporations’
board members to renew the contract for the following
summer and also the winter maintenance services contract
for a further two years. At this time, Callow had only completed
 year one of a two-year contract. The contract was
supposed to remain in place for the winter of 2013-2014.

   After his discussions with Mr. Peixoto and
Mr. Campbell, Mr. Callow thought that he was likely to
get a two-year renewal of his winter maintenance services
 contract and they were satisfied with his services.
[Emphasis added; paras. 40-41.]

[222] The trial judge, who found Callow to be
credible, relied on the following part of his testimony
:


Q. Now is probably a good time to — well tell me about
these discussions. Let’s hear what discussions were you
having.

A. Mostly with Joe [Peixoto], we discussed it, and he said
“yeah, it looks good, I’m sure they’ll be up for it, let me
talk to them”.

Q. Up for what?

A. A two-year renewal.
1018


Q. All right. Anyone else?

A. Kyle Campbell I ran into once or twice on site and we
had discussions as well too.

Q. Okay, and what was your impression of —of — I mean
I suppose you already answered....

A. That I was likely going to be getting a two-year renewal,
there was no reason not to, they were satisfied with the
service, they were happy with it. [Emphasis added.]

(A.R., vol. II, at pp. 67-68)

[223] Apparently not much importance was attached
 to the renewal issue at trial. The amended
statement of claim did not even address this issue; it
instead focused on Baycrest’s knowledge, Callow’s
“freebie” work and the provision of satisfactory services
. Even though the trial judge did consider renewal
, I note that her findings in this regard bore on
Callow’s mistaken belief that the winter agreement
was likely to be renewed (at para. 41); they did not
bear on anything Baycrest actually did or said that
would have misled Callow into that belief.

[224] What Callow thought is one thing; what
Baycrest said or did is another. According to Callow
himself, Mr. Peixoto did not propose anything on
behalf of Baycrest. Mr. Peixoto’s statement that “I’m
sure they’ll be up for it, let me talk to them” (A.R.,
vol. II, at p. 67) clearly meant that despite his favora-
ble opinion, he was not the one making the decision
and that Baycrest had not even considered the mere
possibility of a renewal at the time. It certainly could
not be inferred from this statement that a renewal
was likely. Callow’s testimony does not suggest
that he was misled into believing that Baycrest was
actually contemplating a renewal — Mr. Peixoto’s
response instead presupposes the contrary — nor
does it suggest that Baycrest did or said anything to
negate the risk Callow took that his contract might be
terminated for any other reason than unsatisfactory
services. Indeed, Callow insisted that he had believed
a renewal was likely because “there was no reason
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


not to, they were satisfied with the service, they were
happy with it” (A.R., vol. II, at p. 68).

[225] In his examination for discovery, Callow
had given the same reason for thinking his winter
agreement would be renewed, that is, because “there
was no reason not to” (A.R., vol. II, at p. 49). He
did not refer to his discussions with Mr. Peixoto
or Mr. Campbell. When asked if anyone had told
him that his contract would be renewed, he said he
could not recall. The evidence does not establish
that Mr. Peixoto or Mr. Campbell initiated the discussions
 about renewal. On the contrary, it suggests
that Callow did. When cross-examined about his
“freebie” work, Callow admitted that, although he
was under the mistaken belief that his contract was
likely to be renewed, he was in fact only “hopeful”
that it would be. Nowhere in his testimony did he
suggest that he had been given any information that
could mislead him into believing that Baycrest was
seriously contemplating a two-year renewal instead
of termination.

[226] The trial judge referred to “active communications
 . . . between March/April and
September 12, 2013, which deceived Callow”
(para. 66), and to “representations in anticipation of
the notice period” (para. 67; see also paras. 65 and
76). But those references must be read in light of the
evidence and the reasons as a whole. Even though
the trial judge made credibility findings against
Mr. Peixoto and Mr. Campbell and credibility findings
 in favour of Callow, the evidence pertaining
to renewal supports only a very limited number of
inferences regarding termination.

[227] At most, it can be said that Mr. Peixoto and
Mr. Campbell did not dissuade Callow from entertaining
 hopes when they had a chance to do so.
But, and most importantly, they did not suggest that
1020


Baycrest was actually contemplating a continuation
of their business relationship. If that had been the
case, then I would agree that it might have been jus-
tifiable to infer that Callow had been led to believe
there was no risk that his existing contract would be
terminated before its term. But that was simply not
the case here. In my view, the trial judge did not infer
from the discussions about renewal that Baycrest
had done or said anything to negate the risk that the
winter agreement would be terminated for any other
reason than unsatisfactory services. Had she made
such an inference, it would be subject to appellate
review, as it would not be supported by the evidence.
Given the context discussed above, Mr. Peixoto’s
and Mr. Campbell’s vague and evasive declarations
did not materially contribute to Callow’s mistaken
belief that would have required Baycrest to disclose
additional information.

B. Baycrest’s Satisfaction With Callow’s Services

[228] The trial judge placed great importance on
the fact that Callow’s services had been satisfactory
and that Baycrest’s conduct had given him no reason
to think otherwise (paras. 22, 27, 29-30, 34-36, 39,
41, 46-47 and 55). I note there is no finding that
Baycrest communicated any particular sign of satisfaction
 pertaining to the performance of the winter
agreement past March 19, 2013. That being said,
there is nothing dishonest about Baycrest terminating
the winter agreement after showing its satisfaction
with the quality of Callow’s work.

[229] Further, the parties had explicitly contemplated
 that Baycrest could terminate the winter
agreement even if it was satisfied with Callow’s
performance, as the contract provided that Baycrest
could exercise its termination right for any other
reason than unsatisfactory services. Thus, positive
feedback about Callow’s services cannot justify
Callow’s mistaken belief that the contract would
not be terminated.
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


C. Callow’s Mistaken Belief That the Winter
   Agreement Would Remain in Effect

[230] The trial judge found that Baycrest had “con-
tinu[ed] to represent that the contract was not in
danger” (paras. 65 and 76; see also para. 13). This
finding was essentially grounded on the overall signs
of satisfaction communicated by Baycrest, on its
acceptance of the “freebie” work and on Callow’s
mistaken belief following the discussions pertaining
to renewal. As I have already explained, nothing here
required Baycrest to disclose its intent to terminate
the winter agreement.

[231] What the trial judge did not find is also relevant
. She did not find that Baycrest had decided to
forego its right to terminate the winter agreement.
She did not find that Baycrest had lied to Callow. She
did not find that Baycrest had negated the risk taken
by Callow that his contract would be terminated
for any other reason than unsatisfactory services.
Lastly, she did not clearly indicate why Callow so
firmly believed “that his winter maintenance services
contract would remain in place during the following
winter” (para. 13).

[232] Callow’s belief that there was no risk
Baycrest would exercise its termination right was
based on two things. First, on the positive feedback
he had received regarding his services. In his words,
Baycrest was “happy with it”. However, this is not
very relevant in a context in which Baycrest could
terminate the winter agreement for any other reason
than unsatisfactory services. Second, and most importantly
, Callow’s mistaken belief was based on an
erroneous interpretation of the winter agreement.

[233] At trial, Callow testified that he was aware
of the termination clause, but that he thought the
two-year term made it unenforceable:
1022



Q. . . . So, in that letter, there is a — a statement that
the termination was in breach of the agreement. So, my
question for you is, at that point in time what was your
understanding, why was the termination in breach of the
agreement?

A. Because they asked me, and we entered into a two year
agreement, to provide services both summer and winter;
and I did so at a reduced rate. I upheld my end of the bargain
 which was to perform that work at that reduced rate.
They — and which I might add, I was not paid for, the
landscaping and the final aspect of it, they were supposed
to pay me. They didn’t do it. And I continued to fulfill my
contractual obligations. I expected nothing less than the
same from them.

Q. So — so, when you — because you talk — but you
knew that in the winter contract, there was that termination
 clause.

A. They had a clause written in there. I didn’t believe it be
enforceable because we had a two year contract. That’s the
whole idea to a two year contract. You have contract for
two years. I provide services for two years and they pay
me for those services. [Emphasis added.]

(A.R., vol. II, at p. 120; see also pp. 106-7.)

[234] Even though that was not the position he took
in this Court, Callow’s uninformed interpretation of
the termination provision casts an important light
on the reason why he did not believe there was a
risk the winter agreement would be terminated for
any other reason than unsatisfactory services. The
evidence does not suggest that Baycrest said or did
anything that could have negated that risk, nor does
it suggest that Baycrest had anything to do with
Callow’s erroneous interpretation of the termination
provision. I am therefore of the view that Baycrest
was not required to correct Callow’s mistaken belief
by disclosing information it decided not to disclose.

IV. Conclusion

[235] The trial judge erred in concluding that
Baycrest had to address performance issues or
[2020] 3 R.C.S.


provide prompt notice prior to termination (para. 67).
She did not inquire into whether Baycrest had made
any representations that had misled Callow into
thinking Baycrest would not terminate the winter
agreement for any other reason than unsatisfactory
services. In my view, the trial judge extended the
ambit of the duty of honest performance in a way
that was not consistent with the other principles set
out in Bhasin.

[236] In sum, the narrow issue in this appeal comes
down to this: Did Baycrest lie or otherwise knowingly
 mislead Callow into thinking that there was no
risk it would exercise its right to terminate the winter
agreement for any other reason than unsatisfactory
services? There were no outright lies. Baycrest was
aware of Callow’s mistaken belief that his services
would be required for the upcoming winter. But
Baycrest never forewent the contractual advantage it
had of being able to end the winter agreement at any
time upon 10 days’ notice. Nor did Baycrest say or
do anything that materially contributed to Callow’s
mistaken belief that the winter agreement would
not be terminated for any other reason than unsatisfactory
 services. Regardless of how its conduct is
characterized, Baycrest had no obligation to correct
Callow’s mistaken belief.

[237] To be clear, the result I arrive at should not
be interpreted as meaning that Baycrest’s behaviour
was appropriate or that Callow has no recourse. It
means that Callow’s recourse cannot be based on a
breach of the duty of honest performance. The trial
judge did in fact find that Baycrest had been unjustly
enriched by the “freebie” work (at para. 77), but she
stated that Callow had not provided evidence of his
expenses. That question exceeds the scope of this
appeal, however.

[238]

   Appeal allowed with costs throughout, Côté J.
dissenting.
1024


   Solicitors for the appellant: McCarthy Tétrault,
Toronto; KMH Lawyers, Ottawa.

  Solicitors for the respondents: Gowling WLG
(Canada), Ottawa.

  Solicitors for the intervener the Canadian
Federation of Independent Business: Blake, Cassels
& Graydon, Toronto.

  Solicitors for the intervener the Canadian
Chamber of Commerce: Torys, Toronto.
