English column of danyluk-v-ainsworth-2001-SCC-44.txt, derived mechanically (each line cut at the first run of 3+ spaces; lines starting in the right column dropped). The bilingual original is the source; this copy exists so quotes can be checked against English text alone.

460


Mary Danyluk

v.

Ainsworth Technologies Inc., Ainsworth
Electric Co. Limited, F. Jack Purchase, Paul
S. Gooderham, Jack A. Taylor, Ross
A. Pool, Donald W. Roberts, Timothy
I. Pryor, Clifford J. Ainsworth, John
F. Ainsworth, Kenneth D. Ainsworth,
Melville O’Donohue, Donald J. Hawthorne,
William I. Welsh and Joseph McBride
Watson Respondents
INDEXED AS: DANYLUK v. AINSWORTH TECHNOLOGIES INC.
Neutral citation: 2001 SCC 44.
File No.: 27118.
2000: October 31; 2001: July 12.
Present: McLachlin C.J. and Iacobucci,
Bastarache, Binnie, Arbour and LeBel JJ.

ON APPEAL FROM THE COURT OF APPEAL FOR
ONTARIO
Administrative law — Issue estoppel — Employee fil-
ing complaint against employer under Employment
Standards Act seeking unpaid wages and commissions
— Employee subsequently commencing court action
against employer for wrongful dismissal and unpaid
wages and commissions — Employment standards
officer dismissing employee’s complaint — Employer
arguing that employee’s claim for unpaid wages and
commissions before court barred by issue estoppel —
Whether officer’s failure to observe procedural fairness
in deciding employee’s complaint preventing applica-
tion of issue estoppel — Whether preconditions to appli-
cation of issue estoppel satisfied — If so, whether this
Court should exercise its discretion and refuse to apply
issue estoppel.
In 1993, an employee became involved in a dispute
with her employer over unpaid commissions. No agree-
ment was reached, and the employee filed a complaint
under the Employment Standards Act (“ESA”) seeking
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


unpaid wages, including commissions. The employer
rejected the claim for commissions and eventually took
the position that the employee had resigned. An employ-
ment standards officer spoke with the employee by tele-
phone and met with her for about an hour. Before the
decision was made, the employee commenced a court
action claiming damages for wrongful dismissal and the
unpaid wages and commissions. The ESA proceedings
continued, but the employee was not made aware of the
employer’s submissions in the ESA claim or given an
opportunity to respond to them. The ESA officer
rejected the employee’s claim and ordered the employer
to pay her $2,354.55, representing two weeks’ pay in
lieu of notice. She advised the employer of her decision
and, 10 days later, notified the employee. Although she
had no appeal as of right, the employee was entitled to
apply under the ESA for a statutory review of this deci-
sion. She elected not to do so and carried on with her
wrongful dismissal action. The employer moved to
strike the part of the statement of claim that overlapped
the ESA proceeding. The motions judge considered the
ESA decision to be final and concluded that the claim
for unpaid wages and commissions was barred by issue
estoppel. The Court of Appeal affirmed the decision.

Held: The appeal should be allowed.

Although, in general, issue estoppel is available to
preclude an unsuccessful party from relitigating in the
courts what has already been litigated before an admin-
istrative tribunal, this is not a proper case for its applica-
tion. Finality is a compelling consideration and judicial
decisions should generally be conclusive of the issues
decided unless and until reversed on appeal. However,
estoppel is a public policy doctrine designed to advance
the interests of justice. Where, as here, its application
bars the courthouse door against a claim because of an
administrative decision made in a manifestly improper
and unfair manner, a re-examination of some basic prin-
ciples is warranted.
462


The preconditions to the operation of issue estoppel
are threefold: (1) that the same question has been
decided in earlier proceedings; (2) that the earlier judi-
cial decision was final; and (3) that the parties to that
decision or their privies are the same in both the pro-
ceedings. If the moving party successfully establishes
these preconditions, a court must still determine
whether, as a matter of discretion, issue estoppel ought
to be applied.
The preconditions require the prior proceeding to be
judicial. Here, the ESA decision was judicial. First, the
administrative authority issuing the decision is capable
of receiving and exercising adjudicative authority. Sec-
ond, as a matter of law, the decision was required to be
made in a judicial manner. While the ESA officers util-
ize procedures more flexible than those that apply in the
courts, their adjudicative decisions must be based on
findings of fact and the application of an objective legal
standard to those facts.
The appellant denies the applicability of issue estop-
pel because, as found by the Court of Appeal, the ESA
decision was taken without proper notice to the appel-
lant and she was not given an opportunity to meet the
employer’s case. It is clear that an administrative deci-
sion which is made without jurisdiction from the outset
cannot form the basis of an estoppel. Where an adminis-
trative officer or tribunal initially possessed the jurisdic-
tion to make a decision in a judicial manner but erred in
the exercise of that jurisdiction, the resulting decision is
nevertheless capable of forming the basis of an estoppel.
Alleged errors in carrying out the mandate are matters
to be considered by the court in the exercise of its dis-
cretion. This result makes the principle governing estop-
pel consistent with the law governing judicial review in
Harelkin and collateral attack in Maybrun.
In this case, the pre-conditions for issue estoppel have
been met: the same issue is raised in both proceedings,
the decision of the ESA officer was final for the pur-
poses of the Act since neither the employer nor the
employee took advantage of the internal review proce-
dure, and the parties are identical. The Court must there-
fore decide whether to refuse to apply estoppel as a mat-
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


ter of discretion. Here this Court is entitled to intervene
because the lower courts committed an error of principle
in failing to address the issue of the discretion. The list
of factors to be considered with respect to its exercise is
open. The objective is to ensure that the operation of
issue estoppel promotes the orderly administration of
justice, but not at the cost of real injustice in the particu-
lar case. The factors relevant to this case include the
wording of the statute from which the power to issue the
administrative order derives, the purpose of the legisla-
tion, the availability of an appeal, the safeguards availa-
ble to the parties in the administrative procedure, the
expertise of the administrative decision maker, the cir-
cumstances giving rise to the prior administrative pro-
ceeding and, the most important factor, the potential
injustice. On considering the cumulative effect of the
foregoing factors, the Court in its discretion should
refuse to apply issue estoppel in this case. The stubborn
fact remains that the employee’s claim to commissions
worth $300,000 has simply never been properly consid-
ered and adjudicated.

Cases Cited


Considered: Angle v. Minister of National Revenue,
[1975] 2 S.C.R. 248; disapproved in part: Rasanen v.
Rosemount Instruments Ltd. (1994), 17 O.R. (3d) 267;
referred to: Re Downing and Graydon (1978), 21 O.R.
(2d) 292; Farwell v. The Queen (1894), 22 S.C.R. 553;
Wilson v. The Queen, [1983] 2 S.C.R. 594; R. v.
Litchfield, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 333; R. v. Sarson, [1996]
2 S.C.R. 223; Robinson v. McQuaid (1854), 1 P.E.I.R.
103; Bell v. Miller (1862), 9 Gr. 385; Raison v. Fenwick
(1981), 120 D.L.R. (3d) 622; Wong v. Shell Canada Ltd.
(1995), 15 C.C.E.L. (2d) 182; Machin v. Tomlinson
(2000), 194 D.L.R. (4th) 326; Hamelin v. Davis (1996),
18 B.C.L.R. (3d) 112; Thrasyvoulou v. Environment
Secretary, [1990] 2 A.C. 273; R. v. Consolidated
Maybrun Mines Ltd., [1998] 1 S.C.R. 706; McIntosh v.
Parent, [1924] 4 D.L.R. 420; British Columbia
(Minister of Forests) v. Bugbusters Pest Management
Inc. (1998), 50 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1; Schweneke v. Ontario
(2000), 47 O.R. (3d) 97; Braithwaite v. Nova Scotia
Public Service Long Term Disability Plan Trust Fund
(1999), 176 N.S.R. (2d) 173; Guay v. Lafleur, [1965]
S.C.R. 12; Thoday v. Thoday, [1964] P. 181; Machado
464


v. Pratt & Whitney Canada Inc. (1995), 12 C.C.E.L.
(2d) 132; Randhawa v. Everest & Jennings Canadian
Ltd. (1996), 22 C.C.E.L. (2d) 19; Heynen v. Frito-Lay
Canada Ltd. (1997), 32 C.C.E.L. (2d) 183; Perez v. GE
Capital Technology Management Services Canada Inc.
(1999), 47 C.C.E.L. (2d) 145; Munyal v. Sears Canada
Inc. (1997), 29 C.C.E.L. (2d) 58; Alderman v. North
Shore Studio Management Ltd., [1997] 5 W.W.R. 535;
R. v. Nat Bell Liquors Ltd., [1922] 2 A.C. 128; Harelkin
v. University of Regina, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 561; Poucher v.
Wilkins (1915), 33 O.L.R. 125; Minott v. O’Shanter
Development Co. (1999), 42 O.R. (3d) 321; Saskatoon
Credit Union Ltd. v. Central Park Ent. Ltd. (1988), 22
B.C.L.R. (2d) 89; General Motors of Canada Ltd. v.
Naken, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 72; Arnold v. National
Westminster Bank plc, [1991] 3 All E.R. 41; Susan Shoe
Industries Ltd. v. Ricciardi (1994), 18 O.R. (3d) 660;
Iron v. Saskatchewan (Minister of the Environment &
Public Safety), [1993] 6 W.W.R. 1.

Statutes and Regulations Cited

Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, s. 23(1).
Employment Standards Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. E.14, ss. 1
“wages”, 2(2), 6, 65(1)(a), (b), (c) [rep. & sub. 1991,
c. 16 (Supp.), s. 9(1)], (7) [ad. idem, s. 9(2)], 67(1)
[am. idem, s. 10(1)], (2) [rep. & sub. idem, s. 10(2)],
(3) [ad. idem], (5) [idem], (7) [idem], 68(1) [am. idem,
s. 11(1); am. 1991, c. 5, s. 16; am. 1993, c. 27, sch.],
(3) [rep. & sub. 1991, c. 16 (Supp.), s. 11(2)], (7).
Employment Standards Improvement Act, 1996, S.O.
1996, c. 23, s. 19(1).
O. Reg. 626/00, s. 1(1).

Authors Cited

American Law Institute. Restatement of the Law, Sec-
ond: Judgments 2d, vol. 2. St. Paul, Minn.: American
Law Institute Publishers, 1982.
Brown, Donald J. M., and John M. Evans. Judicial
Review of Administrative Action in Canada, vol. 2.
Toronto: Canvasback, 1998 (loose-leaf updated 2001,
release 2).
Handley, K. R. “Res Judicata: General Principles and
Recent Developments” (1999), 18 Aust. Bar Rev. 214.
Holmested, George Smith, and Garry D. Watson. Onta-
rio Civil Procedure, vol. 3 Supp. Toronto: Carswell,
1984 (loose-leaf updated 2000, release 3).
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


Lange, Donald J. The Doctrine of Res Judicata in
Canada. Markham, Ont.: Butterworths, 2000.
Sopinka, John, Sidney N. Lederman, and Alan W. Bry-
ant. The Law of Evidence in Canada, 2nd ed. Toronto:
Butterworths, 1999.
Spencer Bower, George, and Sir Alexander Kingcome
Turner. The Doctrine of Res Judicata, 3rd ed. by
K. R. Handley. London, U.K.: Butterworths, 1996.
Watson, Garry D. “Duplicative Litigation: Issue Estop-
pel, Abuse of Process and the Death of Mutuality”
(1990), 69 Can. Bar Rev. 623.

APPEAL from a judgment of the Ontario Court
of Appeal (1998), 42 O.R. (3d) 235, 167 D.L.R.
(4th) 385, 116 O.A.C. 225, 12 Admin. L.R. (3d) 1,
41 C.C.E.L. (2d) 19, 27 C.P.C. (4th) 91, [1998]
O.J. No. 5047 (QL), dismissing the appellant’s
appeal from a decision of the Ontario Court (Gen-
eral Division) rendered on June 10, 1996. Appeal
allowed.

Howard A. Levitt and J. Michael Mulroy, for the
appellant.

John E. Brooks and Rita M. Samson, for the
respondents.

The judgment of the Court was delivered by

BINNIE J. — The appellant claims that she was
fired from her position as an account executive
with the respondent Ainsworth Technologies Inc.
on October 12, 1993. She says that at the time of
her dismissal she was owed by her employer some
$300,000 in unpaid commissions. The courts in
Ontario have held that she is “estopped” from hav-
ing her day in court on this issue because of an ear-
lier failed attempt to claim the same unpaid monies
under the Employment Standards Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. E.14 (“ESA” or “Act”). An employment stan-
dards officer, adopting a procedure which the
Ontario Court of Appeal held to be improper and
unfair, denied the claim. I agree that in general
issue estoppel is available to preclude an unsuc-
cessful party from relitigating in the courts what
has already been unsuccessfully litigated before an
administrative tribunal, but in my view this was
not a proper case for its application. A judicial
doctrine developed to serve the ends of justice
466


should not be applied mechanically to work an
injustice. I would allow the appeal.
I. Facts
2
involved in a dispute with her employer, the
respondent Ainsworth Technologies Inc., over
unpaid commissions. The appellant met with her
superiors and sent various letters to them outlining
her position. These letters were generally copied to
her lawyer, Mr. Howard A. Levitt. Her principal
complaint concerned an alleged entitlement to
commissions of about $200,000 in respect of a
project known as the CIBC Lan project, plus other
commissions which brought the total to about
$300,000.
3
from the employer. On October 4, 1993, she filed a
complaint under the ESA seeking unpaid wages,
including commissions. It is not clear on the
record whether she had legal advice on this aspect
of the matter. On October 5, the employer wrote to
the appellant rejecting her claim for commissions
and eventually took the position that she had
resigned and physically escorted her off the prem-
ises.
4
Burke, was assigned to investigate the appellant’s
complaint. She spoke with the appellant by tele-
phone and on or about January 30, 1994 met with
her for about an hour. The appellant gave Ms.
Burke various documents including her correspon-
dence with the employer. They had no further
meetings.
5
filing her claim under the Act, but as yet without
an ESA decision, the appellant, through Mr. Levitt,
commenced a court action in which she claimed
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


damages for wrongful dismissal. She also claimed
the unpaid wages and commissions that were
already the subject-matter of her ESA claim.

On June 1, 1994, solicitors for the employer
wrote to Ms. Burke responding to the appellant’s
claim. The employer’s letter included a number of
documents to substantiate its position. None of this
was copied to the appellant. Nor did Ms. Burke
provide the appellant with information about the
employer’s position; nor did she give the appellant
the opportunity to respond to whatever the appel-
lant may have assumed to be the position the
employer was likely to take. The appellant, in
short, was left out of the loop.

On September 23, 1994, the ESA officer advised
the respondent employer (but not the appellant)
that she had rejected the appellant’s claim for
unpaid commissions. At the same time she ordered
the employer to pay the appellant $2,354.55, repre-
senting two weeks’ pay in lieu of notice. Ten days
later, by letter dated October 3, 1994, Ms. Burke
for the first time advised the appellant of the order
made against the employer for two weeks’ termi-
nation pay and the rejection of her claim for the
commissions. The letter stated in part: “[w]ith
respect to your claim for unpaid wages, the investi-
gation revealed there is no entitlement to
$300,000.00 commission as claimed by you”. The
letter went on to explain that the appellant could
apply to the Director of Employment Standards for
a review of this decision. Ms. Burke repeated this
advice in a subsequent telephone conversation with
the appellant. The appellant did not apply to the
Director for a review of Ms. Burke’s decision;
instead, she decided to carry on with her wrongful
dismissal action in the civil courts.

The respondents contended that the claim for
unpaid wages and commissions was barred by
issue estoppel. They brought a motion in the appel-
lant’s civil action to strike the relevant paragraphs
468


from the statement of claim. On June 10, 1996,
McCombs J. of the Ontario Court (General Divi-
sion) granted the respondents’ motion. Only her
claim for damages for wrongful dismissal was
allowed to proceed. On December 2, 1998, the
appellant’s appeal was dismissed by the Court of
Appeal for Ontario.

II. Judgments

A. Ontario Court (General Division) (June 10,
1996)
9
doctrine of issue estoppel applied in the present
case. Following Rasanen v. Rosemount Instru-
ments Ltd. (1994), 17 O.R. (3d) 267 (C.A.), he
concluded that issue estoppel could apply to issues
previously determined by an administrative officer
or tribunal. In his view, the sole issue to be deter-
mined was whether the ESA officer’s decision was
a final determination. The motions judge noted
that the appellant did not seek to appeal or review
the ESA officer’s decision under s. 67(2) of the
Act, as she was entitled to do if she wished to con-
test that decision. He considered the ESA decision
to be final. The criteria for the application of issue
estoppel were therefore met. The paragraphs relat-
ing to the appellant’s claim for unpaid wages and
commissions were struck from her statement of
claim.

B. Court of Appeal for Ontario (1998), 42 O.R.
(3d) 235
10
J.A. for the court identified, at pp. 239-40, the
issues raised by the appellant’s appeal:
This case concerns the second requirement of issue
estoppel, that the decision which is said to create the
estoppel be a final judicial decision. The appellant sub-
mits that the decision of an employment standards
officer is neither judicial nor final. She also submits
that, in any event, the process followed by Ms. Burke in
this particular case was unfair and therefore her decision
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


should not create an estoppel. Specifically, the appellant
argues she was not treated fairly as she was not provided
with a copy of the submissions made by the employer
and thus not given an opportunity to respond to those
submissions.

In rejecting these submissions, Rosenberg J.A.
grouped them under three headings: whether the
ESA officer’s decision was final; whether the ESA
officer’s decision was judicial; and the effect of
procedural unfairness on the application of the
doctrine of issue estoppel.

In his view, the decision of the officer in the
present case was final because neither party exer-
cised the right of internal appeal under s. 67(2) of
the Act. Moreover, while not all administrative
decisions that finally determine the rights of par-
ties will be “judicial” for purposes of issue estop-
pel, Rosenberg J.A. found that the statutory proce-
dure set out in the Act satisfied the requirements.
He considered Re Downing and Graydon (1978),
21 O.R. (2d) 292 (C.A.), to be “determinative of
this issue” (p. 249).

Lastly, Rosenberg J.A. addressed the issue of
whether failure by the ESA officer to observe pro-
cedural fairness affected the application of the doc-
trine of issue estoppel in this case. He agreed that
the ESA officer had in fact failed to observe proce-
dural fairness in deciding upon the appellant’s
complaint. Nevertheless, this failure did not pre-
vent the operation of issue estoppel (at p. 252):
The officer was required to give the appellant access to,
and an opportunity to refute, any information gathered
by the officer in the course of her investigation that was
prejudicial to the appellant’s claim. At a minimum, the
appellant was entitled to a copy of the June 1, 1994 let-
ter and a summary of any other information gathered in
the course of the investigation that was prejudicial to her
claim. She was also entitled to a fair opportunity to con-
470


sider and reply to that information. The appellant was
denied the opportunity to know the case against her and
have an opportunity to meet it: Ms. Burke failed to act
judicially. In this particular case, this failure does not,
however, affect the operation of issue estoppel.

14
are obliged to act judicially, failure to do so in a
particular case, at least if there is a possibility of
appeal, will not preclude the operation of issue
estoppel. This conclusion is based on the policy
considerations underlying two rules of administra-
tive law (at p. 252):

These two rules are: (1) that the discretionary remedies
of judicial review will be refused where an adequate
alternative remedy exists; and (2) the rule against collat-
eral attack. These rules, in effect, require that the parties
pursue their remedies through the administrative process
established by the legislature. Where an appeal route is
available the parties will not be permitted to ignore it in
favour of the court process.

15
applied, under s. 67(3) of the Act for a review of
the ESA officer’s decision, the adjudicator con-
ducting such a review would have been required to
hold a hearing. This supported his view that the
review process provided by the Act is an adequate
alternative remedy. Rosenberg J.A. concluded, at
p. 256:

In summary, Ms. Burke did not accord this appellant
natural justice. The appellant’s recourse was to seek
review of Ms. Burke’s decision. She failed to do so.
That decision is binding upon her and her employer.

16
estoppel and dismissed the appellant’s appeal.
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


III. Relevant Statutory Provisions

Employment Standards Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. E.14

1. In this Act,
.

“wages” means any monetary remuneration payable by
an employer to an employee under the terms of a con-
tract of employment, oral or written, express or implied,
any payment to be made by an employer to an employee
under this Act and any allowances for room or board as
prescribed in the regulations or under an agreement or
arrangement therefor but does not include,
(a) tips and other gratuities,
(b) any sums paid as gifts or bonuses that are dependent
on the discretion of the employer and are not related
to hours, production or efficiency,
(c) travelling allowances or expenses,
(d) contributions made by an employer to a fund, plan
or arrangement to which Part X of this Act applies;
(“salaire”)
.

6. — (1) No civil remedy of an employee against his
or her employer is suspended or affected by this Act.
(2) Where an employee initiates a civil proceeding
against his or her employer under this Act, notice of the
proceeding shall be served on the Director in the pre-
scribed form on the same date the civil proceeding is set
down for trial.
65. — (1) Where an employment standards officer
finds that an employee is entitled to any wages from an
employer, the officer may,
(a) arrange with the employer that the employer pay
directly to the employee the wages to which the
employee is entitled;
(b) receive from the employer on behalf of the
employee any wages to be paid to the employee as
the result of a compromise or settlement; or
(c) issue an order in writing to the employer to pay
forthwith to the Director in trust any wages to which
an employee is entitled and in addition such order
shall provide for payment, by the employer to the
472


Director, of administration costs in the amount of 10
per cent of the wages or $100, whichever is the
greater.
.

(7) If an employer fails to apply under section 68 for
a review of an order issued by an employment standards
officer, the order becomes final and binding against the
employer even though a review hearing is held to deter-
mine another person’s liability under this Act.
.

67. — (1) Where, following a complaint in writing by
an employee, an employment standards officer finds that
an employer has paid the wages to which an employee is
entitled or has found that the employee has no other
entitlements or that there are no actions which the
employer is to do or is to refrain from doing in order to
be in compliance with this Act, the officer may refuse to
issue an order to an employer and upon refusing to do so
shall advise the employee of the refusal by prepaid letter
addressed to the employee at his or her last known
address.

(2) An employee who considers himself or herself
aggrieved by the refusal to issue an order to an employer
or by the issuance of an order that in his or her view
does not include all of the wages or other entitlements to
which he or she is entitled may apply to the Director in
writing within fifteen days of the date of the mailing of
the letter mentioned in subsection (1) or the date of the
issue of the order or such longer period as the Director
may for special reasons allow for a review of the refusal
or of the amount of the order.

(3) Upon receipt of an application for review, the
Director may appoint an adjudicator who shall hold a
hearing.
.

(5) The adjudicator who is conducting the hearing
may with necessary modifications exercise the powers
conferred on an employment standards officer under this
Act and may make an order with respect to the refusal
or an order to amend, rescind or affirm the order of the
employment standards officer.
.
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


(7) The order of the adjudicator is not subject to a
review under section 68 and is final and binding on the
parties.
68. — (1) An employer who considers themself
aggrieved by an order made under section 45, 48, 51,
56.2, 58.22 or 65, upon paying the wages ordered to be
paid and the penalty thereon, if any, may, within a
period of fifteen days after the date of delivery or ser-
vice of the order, or such longer period as the Director
may for special reasons allow and provided that the
wages have not been paid out under subsection 72 (2),
apply for a review of the order by way of a hearing.
.

(3) The Director shall select a referee from the panel
of referees to hear the review.
.

(7) A decision of the referee under this section is final
and binding upon the parties thereto and such other par-
ties as the referee may specify.

IV. Analysis

The law rightly seeks a finality to litigation. To
advance that objective, it requires litigants to put
their best foot forward to establish the truth of their
allegations when first called upon to do so. A liti-
gant, to use the vernacular, is only entitled to one
bite at the cherry. The appellant chose the ESA as
her forum. She lost. An issue, once decided, should
not generally be re-litigated to the benefit of the
losing party and the harassment of the winner. A
person should only be vexed once in the same
cause. Duplicative litigation, potential inconsistent
results, undue costs, and inconclusive proceedings
are to be avoided.

Finality is thus a compelling consideration and
judicial decisions should generally be conclusive
of the issues decided unless and until reversed on
appeal. However, estoppel is a doctrine of public
policy that is designed to advance the interests of
474


justice. Where as here, its application bars the
courthouse door against the appellant’s $300,000
claim because of an administrative decision taken
in a manner which was manifestly improper and
unfair (as found by the Court of Appeal itself), a
re-examination of some basic principles is war-
ranted.

20
to prevent abuse of the decision-making process.
One of the oldest is the doctrine estoppel per rem
judicatem with its roots in Roman law, the idea
that a dispute once judged with finality is not sub-
ject to relitigation: Farwell v. The Queen (1894),
22 S.C.R. 553, at p. 558; Angle v. Minister of
National Revenue, [1975] 2 S.C.R. 248, at pp. 267-
68. The bar extends both to the cause of action
thus adjudicated (variously referred to as claim or
cause of action or action estoppel), as well as pre-
cluding relitigation of the constituent issues or
material facts necessarily embraced therein (usu-
ally called issue estoppel): G. S. Holmested and
G. D. Watson, Ontario Civil Procedure (loose-
leaf), vol. 3 Supp., at 21§17 et seq. Another aspect
of the judicial policy favouring finality is the rule
against collateral attack, i.e., that a judicial order
pronounced by a court of competent jurisdiction
should not be brought into question in subsequent
proceedings except those provided by law for the
express purpose of attacking it: Wilson v. The
Queen, [1983] 2 S.C.R. 594; R. v. Litchfield,
[1993] 4 S.C.R. 333; R. v. Sarson, [1996] 2 S.C.R.
223.

21
text of prior court proceedings. They have since
been extended, with some necessary modifications,
to decisions classified as being of a judicial or
quasi-judicial nature pronounced by administrative
officers and tribunals. In that context the more spe-
cific objective is to balance fairness to the parties
with the protection of the administrative decision-
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


making process, whose integrity would be under-
mined by too readily permitting collateral attack or
relitigation of issues once decided.

The extension of the doctrine of issue estoppel
in Canada to administrative agencies is traced back
to cases in the mid-1800s by D. J. Lange in The
Doctrine of Res Judicata in Canada (2000), at
p. 94 et seq., including Robinson v. McQuaid
(1854), 1 P.E.I.R. 103 (S.C.), at pp. 104-5, and
Bell v. Miller (1862), 9 Gr. 385 (U.C. Ch.), at
p. 386. The modern cases at the appellate level
include Raison v. Fenwick (1981), 120 D.L.R. (3d)
622 (B.C.C.A.); Rasanen, supra; Wong v. Shell
Canada Ltd. (1995), 15 C.C.E.L. (2d) 182 (Alta.
C.A.); Machin v. Tomlinson (2000), 194 D.L.R.
(4th) 326 (Ont. C.A.); and Hamelin v. Davis
(1996), 18 B.C.L.R. (3d) 112 (C.A.). See also
Thrasyvoulou v. Environment Secretary, [1990] 2
A.C. 273 (H.L.). Modifications were necessary
because of the “major differences that can exist
between [administrative orders and court orders]
in relation, inter alia, to their legal nature and the
position within the state structure of the institu-
tions that issue them”: R. v. Consolidated Maybrun
Mines Ltd., [1998] 1 S.C.R. 706, at para. 4. There
is generally no dispute that court orders are judicial
orders; the same cannot be said of the myriad of
orders that are issued across the range of adminis-
trative tribunals.

In this appeal the parties have not argued “cause
of action” estoppel, apparently taking the view that
the statutory framework of the ESA claim suffi-
ciently distinguishes it from the common law
framework of the court case. I therefore say no
more about it. They have however, joined issue on
476


the application of issue estoppel and the relevance
of the rule against collateral attack.
24
Middleton J.A. of the Ontario Court of Appeal in
McIntosh v. Parent, [1924] 4 D.L.R. 420, at p. 422:
When a question is litigated, the judgment of the Court
is a final determination as between the parties and their
privies. Any right, question, or fact distinctly put in
issue and directly determined by a Court of competent
jurisdiction as a ground of recovery, or as an answer to a
claim set up, cannot be re-tried in a subsequent suit
between the same parties or their privies, though for a
different cause of action. The right, question, or fact,
once determined, must, as between them, be taken to be
conclusively established so long as the judgment
remains. [Emphasis added.]

This statement was adopted by Laskin J. (later
C.J.), dissenting in Angle, supra, at pp. 267-68.
This description of the issues subject to estoppel
(“[a]ny right, question or fact distinctly put in
issue and directly determined”) is more stringent
than the formulation in some of the older cases for
cause of action estoppel (e.g., “all matters which
were, or might properly have been, brought into
litigation”, Farwell, supra, at p. 558). Dickson J.
(later C.J.), speaking for the majority in Angle,
supra, at p. 255, subscribed to the more stringent
definition for the purpose of issue estoppel. “It will
not suffice” he said, “if the question arose collater-
ally or incidentally in the earlier proceedings or is
one which must be inferred by argument from the
judgment.” The question out of which the estoppel
is said to arise must have been “fundamental to the
decision arrived at” in the earlier proceeding. In
other words, as discussed below, the estoppel
extends to the material facts and the conclusions of
law or of mixed fact and law (“the questions”) that
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


were necessarily (even if not explicitly) deter-
mined in the earlier proceedings.

The preconditions to the operation of issue
estoppel were set out by Dickson J. in Angle,
supra, at p. 254:
(1) that the same question has been decided;
(2) that the judicial decision which is said to cre-
ate the estoppel was final; and,
(3) that the parties to the judicial decision or their
privies were the same persons as the parties to
the proceedings in which the estoppel is raised
or their privies.

The appellant’s argument is that even though the
ESA officer was required to make a decision in a
judicial manner, she failed to do so. Although she
had jurisdiction under the ESA to deal with the
claim, the ESA officer lost jurisdiction when she
failed to disclose to the appellant the case the
appellant had to meet and to give the appellant the
opportunity to be heard in answer to the case put
against her. The ESA officer therefore never made
a “judicial decision” as required. The appellant
also says that her own failure to exercise her right
to seek internal administrative review of the deci-
sion should not be given the conclusive effect
adopted by the Ontario Court of Appeal. Even if
the conditions precedent to issue estoppel were
present, she says, the court had a discretion to
relieve against the harsh effects of estoppel per
rem judicatem in the circumstances of this case,
and erred in failing to do so.

A. The Statutory Scheme

1. The Employment Standards Officer

The ESA applies to “every contract of employ-
ment, oral or written, express or implied” in Onta-
rio (s. 2(2)) subject to certain exceptions under the
regulations, and establishes a number of minimum
478


employment standards for the protection of
employees. These include hours of work, mini-
mum wages, overtime pay, benefit plans, public
holidays and vacation with pay. More specifically,
the Act provides a summary procedure under
which aggrieved employees can seek redress with
respect to an employer’s alleged failure to comply
with these standards. The objective is to make
redress available, where it is appropriate at all,
expeditiously and cheaply. In the first instance, the
dispute is referred to an employment standards
officer. ESA officers are public servants in the
Ministry of Labour. They are generally not legally
trained, but have some experience in labour rela-
tions. The statute does not set out any particular
procedure that must be followed in disposing of
claims. ESA officers are given wide powers to
enter premises, inspect and remove documents and
make other relevant inquiries. If liability is found,
ESA officers have broad powers of enforcement
(s. 65).

28
speaking, the ESA officer contacts the employer to
ascertain whether in fact wages are unpaid and if
so for what reason. Although in this case there was
a one-hour meeting between the ESA officer and
the appellant, there is no requirement for such a
face-to-face meeting, and clearly there is no con-
templation of any sort of oral hearing in which
both parties are present. It is a rough-and-ready
procedure that is wholly inappropriate, one might
think, to the definitive resolution of a contractual
claim of some legal and factual complexity.

29
such a forum. The services of the ESA officer are
supplied free of charge. Legal representation is
unnecessary. The process moves more rapidly than
could realistically be expected in the courts. There
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


are corresponding disadvantages. The ESA officer
is likely not to have legal training and has neither
the time nor the resources to deal with a contract
claim in a manner comparable to the courtroom
setting. At the time of these proceedings a double
standard was applied to an appeal (or, as it is
called, a “review”). The employer was entitled as
of right to a review (s. 68) but, as discussed below,
the employee could ask for one but the request
could be refused by the Director (s. 67(3)). At the
time, as well, there was no monetary limit on the
ESA officer’s jurisdiction. The Act has since been
amended to provide an upper limit on claims of
$10,000 (S.O. 1996, c. 23, s. 19(1)). Had the ESA
officer’s determination gone the other way, the
employer could have been saddled with a $300,000
liability arising out of a deeply flawed decision
unless reversed on an administrative review or
quashed by a supervising court.

2. The Review Process

The employee, as stated, has no appeal as of
right. Section 67(2) of the Act provides that an
employee dissatisfied with the decision at first
instance may apply to the Director for an adminis-
trative review in writing within 15 days of the date
of the mailing of the employment standards
officer’s decision. Under s. 67(3), “the Director
may appoint an adjudicator who shall hold a hear-
ing” (emphasis added). The word “may” grants the
Director a discretion to hold or not to hold a hear-
ing. The Ontario Court of Appeal noted this point,
but said the parties had attached little importance
to it.


It seems clear the legislature did not intend to
confer an appeal as of right. Where the Director
480


does appoint an adjudicator a hearing is mandated
by the Act. Further delay and expense to the Min-
istry and the parties would follow as a matter of
course. The juxtaposition in s. 67(3) of “may” and
“shall” (and in the French text, the instruction that
the Director “peut nommer un arbitre de griefs
pour tenir une audience” (emphasis added)) puts
the matter beyond doubt. The Ontario legislature
intended the Director to have a discretion to
decline to refer a matter to an adjudicator which, in
his or her opinion, is simply not justified. Even the
adjudicators hearing a review under s. 67(3) of the
Act are not by statute required to be legally
trained. It was likely considered undesirable by the
Ontario legislature to give each and every dissatis-
fied employee a review as of right, particularly
where the amounts in issue are often relatively
modest. The discretion must be exercised accord-
ing to proper principles, of course, but a discretion
it remains.


32
tor would then have looked at the appellant’s claim
de novo and would undoubtedly have shared the
employer documents with the appellant and given
her every opportunity to respond and comment. I
agree that under the scheme of the Act procedural
defects at the ESA officer level, including a failure
to provide proper notice and an opportunity to be
heard in response to the opposing case, can be rec-
tified on review. The respondent says the appel-
lant, having elected to proceed under the Act, was
required to seek an internal review if she was dis-
satisfied with the initial outcome. Not having done
so, she is estopped from pursuing her $300,000
claim. The appellant says that the ESA procedure
was so deeply flawed that she was entitled to walk
away from it.
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


B. The Applicability of Issue Estoppel
1. Issue Estoppel: A Two-Step Analysis

The rules governing issue estoppel should not
be mechanically applied. The underlying purpose
is to balance the public interest in the finality of
litigation with the public interest in ensuring that
justice is done on the facts of a particular case.
(There are corresponding private interests.) The
first step is to determine whether the moving party
(in this case the respondent) has established the
preconditions to the operation of issue estoppel set
out by Dickson J. in Angle, supra. If successful,
the court must still determine whether, as a matter
of discretion, issue estoppel ought to be applied:
British Columbia (Minister of Forests) v. Bugbus-
ters Pest Management Inc. (1998), 50 B.C.L.R.
(3d) 1 (C.A.), at para. 32; Schweneke v. Ontario
(2000), 47 O.R. (3d) 97 (C.A.), at paras. 38-39;
Braithwaite v. Nova Scotia Public Service Long
Term Disability Plan Trust Fund (1999), 176
N.S.R. (2d) 173 (C.A.), at para. 56.

The appellant was quite entitled, in the first
instance, to invoke the jurisdiction of the Ontario
superior court to deal with her various monetary
claims. The respondent was not entitled as of right
to the imposition of an estoppel. It was up to the
court to decide whether, in the exercise of its dis-
cretion, it would decline to hear aspects of the
claims that were previously the subject of ESA
administrative proceedings.
2. The Judicial Nature of the Decision

A common element of the preconditions to issue
estoppel set out by Dickson J. in Angle, supra, is
the fundamental requirement that the decision in
the prior proceeding be a judicial decision.
According to the authorities (see e.g., G. Spencer
Bower, A. K. Turner and K. R. Handley, The Doc-
482


trine of Res Judicata (3rd ed. 1996), at paras.
18-20), there are three elements that may be taken
into account. First is to examine the nature of the
administrative authority issuing the decision. Is it
an institution that is capable of receiving and exer-
cising adjudicative authority? Secondly, as a mat-
ter of law, is the particular decision one that was
required to be made in a judicial manner? Thirdly,
as a mixed question of law and fact, was the deci-
sion made in a judicial manner? These are distinct
requirements:
It is of no avail to prove that the alleged res judicata was
a decision, or that it was pronounced according to judi-
cial principles, unless it emanated from such a tribunal
in the exercise of its adjudicative functions; nor is it suf-
ficient that it was pronounced by such a tribunal unless
it was a judicial decision on the merits. It is important,
therefore, at the outset to have a proper understanding of
what constitutes a judicial tribunal and a judicial deci-
sion for present purposes.

(Spencer Bower, Turner and Handley, supra, para.
20)
36
ular decision in question was actually made in
accordance with judicial requirements, I note the
recent ex curia statement of Handley J. (the current
editor of The Doctrine of Res Judicata) that:
The prior decision judicial, arbitral, or administrative,
must have been made within jurisdiction before it can
give rise to res judicata estoppels.

(“Res Judicata: General Principles and Recent
Developments” (1999), 18 Aust. Bar Rev. 214, at
p. 215)
37
this third aspect, i.e., is a decision taken without
regard to requirements of notice and an opportu-
nity to be heard capable of supporting an issue
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


estoppel? In my opinion, the answer to this ques-
tion is yes.
(a) The Institutional Framework

The decision relied on by Rosenberg J.A. in this
respect relates to the generic role and function of
the ESA officer: Re Downing and Graydon, supra,
per Blair J.A., at p. 305:
In the present case, the employment standards officers
have the power to adjudicate as well as to investigate.
Their investigation is made for the purpose of providing
them with information on which to base the decision
they must make. The duties of the employment stan-
dards officers embrace all the important indicia of the
exercise of a judicial power including the ascertainment
of facts, the application of the law to those facts and the
making of a decision which is binding upon the parties.
The parties did not dispute that ESA officials could
properly be given adjudicative responsibilities to
be discharged in a judicial manner. An earlier leg-
islative limit of $4,000 on unpaid wages (exclud-
ing severance pay and benefits payable under preg-
nancy and parental provisions) was eliminated in
1991 by S.O. 1991, c. 16, s. 9(1), but subsequent to
the ESA decision in the present case a new limit of
$10,000 was imposed. This is the same limit as is
imposed on the Small Claims Court by the Courts
of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, s. 23(1), and
O. Reg. 626/00, s. 1(1).
(b) The Nature of ESA Decisions Under Section
65(1)

An administrative tribunal may have judicial as
well as administrative or ministerial functions. So
may an administrative officer.

One distinction between administrative and
judicial decisions lies in differentiating adjudica-
484


tive from investigative functions. In the latter
mode the ESA officer is taking the initiative to
gather information. The ESA officer acts as a self-
starting investigator who is not confined within the
limits of the adversarial process. The distinction
between investigative and adjudicative powers is
discussed in Guay v. Lafleur, [1965] S.C.R. 12, at
pp. 17-18. The inapplicability of issue estoppel to
investigations is noted by Diplock L.J. in Thoday
v. Thoday, [1964] P. 181 (Eng. C.A.), at p. 197.
41
tive functions, they must exercise their adjudica-
tive functions in a judicial manner. While they util-
ize procedures more flexible than those that apply
in the courts, their decisions must be based on
findings of fact and the application of an objective
legal standard to those facts. This is characteristic
of a judicial function: D. J. M. Brown and
J. M. Evans, Judicial Review of Administrative
Action in Canada (1998), vol. 2, § 7:1310, p. 7-7.
42
information had been gathered, is of a judicial
nature.
(c) Particulars of the Decision in Question
43
decision of the ESA officer in this case was in fact
reached contrary to the principles of natural jus-
tice. The appellant had neither notice of the
employer’s case nor an opportunity to respond.
44
say the decision ought to have been reached in a
judicial manner. The question is: Was it decided in
a judicial manner in this case? There is some sup-
port for this view in Rasanen, supra, per Abella
J.A., at p. 280:
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


As long as the hearing process in the tribunal pro-
vides parties with an opportunity to know and meet the
case against them, and so long as the decision is within
the tribunal’s jurisdiction, then regardless of how
closely the process mirrors a trial or its procedural ante-
cedents, I can see no principled basis for exempting
issues adjudicated by tribunals from the operation of
issue estoppel in a subsequent action. [Emphasis added.]


Trial level decisions in Ontario subsequently
adopted this approach: Machado v. Pratt &
Whitney Canada Inc. (1995), 12 C.C.E.L. (2d) 132
(Ont. Ct. (Gen. Div.)); Randhawa v. Everest &
Jennings Canadian Ltd. (1996), 22 C.C.E.L. (2d)
19 (Ont. Ct. (Gen. Div.)); Heynen v. Frito-Lay
Canada Ltd. (1997), 32 C.C.E.L. (2d) 183 (Ont.
Ct. (Gen. Div.)); Perez v. GE Capital Technology
Management Services Canada Inc. (1999), 47
C.C.E.L. (2d) 145 (Ont. S.C.J.). The statement of
Métivier J. in Munyal v. Sears Canada Inc. (1997),
29 C.C.E.L. (2d) 58 (Ont. Ct. (Gen. Div.)), at p.
60, reflects that position:

The plaintiff relies on [Rasanen] and other similar
decisions to assert that the principle of issue estoppel
should apply to administrative decisions. This is true
only where the decision is the result of a fair, unbiased
adjudicative process where “the hearing process pro-
vides parties with an opportunity to know and meet the
case against them”.


In Wong, supra, the Alberta Court of Appeal
rejected an attack on the decision of an employ-
ment standards review officer and held that the
ESA decision was adequate to create an estoppel
as long as “the appellant knew of the case against
him and was given an opportunity to state his posi-
tion” (para. 20). See also Alderman v. North Shore
Studio Management Ltd., [1997] 5 W.W.R. 535
(B.C.S.C.).
486


47
denial of natural justice deprives the ESA decision
of its character as a “judicial” decision rests on a
misconception. Flawed the decision may be, but
“judicial” (as distinguished from administrative or
legislative) it remains. Once it is determined that
the decision maker was capable of receiving and
exercising adjudicative authority and that the par-
ticular decision was one that was required to be
made in a judicial manner, the decision does not
cease to have that character (“judicial”) because
the decision maker erred in carrying out his or her
functions. As early as R. v. Nat Bell Liquors Ltd.,
[1922] 2 A.C. 128 (H.L.), it was held that a con-
viction entered by an Alberta magistrate could not
be quashed for lack of jurisdiction on the grounds
that the depositions showed that there was no evi-
dence to support the conviction or that the magis-
trate misdirected himself in considering the evi-
dence. The jurisdiction to try the charges was
distinguished from alleged errors in “the obser-
vance of the law in the course of its exercise”
(p. 156). If the conditions precedent to the exercise
of a judicial jurisdiction are satisfied (as here),
subsequent errors in its exercise, including viola-
tions of natural justice, render the decision voida-
ble, not void: Harelkin v. University of Regina,
[1979] 2 S.C.R. 561, at pp. 584-85. The decision
remains a “judicial decision”, although seriously
flawed by the want of proper notice and the denial
of the opportunity to be heard.

48
judicatem is closely linked to the rule against col-
lateral attack, and indeed to the principles of judi-
cial review. If the appellant had gone to court to
seek judicial review of the ESA officer’s decision
without first following the internal administrative
review route, she would have been confronted with
the decision of this Court in Harelkin, supra. In
that case a university student failed in his judicial
review application to quash the decision of a
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


faculty committee of the University of Regina
which found his academic performance to be
unsatisfactory. The faculty committee was required
to act in a judicial manner but failed, as here, to
give proper notice and an opportunity to be heard.
It was held that the failure did not deprive the
faculty committee of its adjudicative jurisdiction.
Its decision was subject to judicial review, but this
was refused in the exercise of the Court’s discre-
tion. Adoption of the appellant’s theory in this case
would create an anomalous result. If she is correct
that the ESA officer stepped outside her judicial
role and lost jurisdiction for all purposes, including
issue estoppel, the Harelkin barrier to judicial
review would be neatly sidestepped. She would
have no need to seek judicial review to set aside
the ESA decision. She would be, on her theory,
entitled as of right to have it ignored in her civil
action.

The appellant’s position would also create an
anomalous situation under the rule against collat-
eral attack. As noted by the respondent, the rejec-
tion of issue estoppel in this case would constitute,
in a sense, a successful collateral attack on the
ESA decision, which has been impeached neither
by administrative review nor judicial review. On
the appellant’s theory, an excess of jurisdiction in
the course of the ESA proceeding would prevent
issue estoppel, even though Maybrun, supra, says
that an act in excess of a jurisdiction which the
decision maker initially possessed does not neces-
sarily open the decision to collateral attack. It
depends, according to Maybrun, on which forum
488


the legislature intended the jurisdictional attack to
be made in, the administrative review forum or the
court (para. 49).

50
administrative proceedings should be encouraged
to pursue whatever administrative remedy is avail-
able. Here, it is worth repeating, she elected the
ESA forum. Employers and employees should be
able to rely on ESA determinations unless steps
are taken promptly to set them aside. One major
legislative objective of the ESA scheme is to facili-
tate a quick resolution of termination benefits so
that both employee and employer can get on to
other things. Where, as here, the ESA issues are
determined within a year, a contract claim could
nevertheless still be commenced thereafter in
Ontario within six years of the alleged breach, pro-
ducing a lingering five years of uncertainty. This is
to be discouraged.

51
decision which is made without jurisdiction from
the outset cannot form the basis of an estoppel.
The conditions precedent to the adjudicative juris-
diction must be satisfied. Where arguments can be
made that an administrative officer or tribunal ini-
tially possessed the jurisdiction to make a decision
in a judicial manner but erred in the exercise of
that jurisdiction, the resulting decision is neverthe-
less capable of forming the basis of an estoppel.
Alleged errors in carrying out the mandate are
matters to be considered by the court in the exer-
cise of its discretion. This result makes the princi-
ple governing estoppel consistent with the law
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


governing judicial review in Harelkin, supra, and
collateral attack in Maybrun, supra.

Where I differ from the Ontario Court of Appeal
in this case is in its conclusion that the failure of
the appellant to seek such an administrative review
of the ESA officer’s flawed decision was fatal to
her position. In my view, with respect, the refusal
of the ESA officer to afford the appellant proper
notice and the opportunity to be heard are matters
of great importance in the exercise of the court’s
discretion, as will be seen.

I turn now to the three preconditions to issue
estoppel set out by Dickson J. in Angle, supra, at
p. 254.
3. Issue Estoppel: Applying the Tests
(a) That the Same Question Has Been Decided

A cause of action has traditionally been defined
as comprising every fact which it would be neces-
sary for the plaintiff to prove, if disputed, in order
to support his or her right to the judgment of the
court: Poucher v. Wilkins (1915), 33 O.L.R. 125
(C.A.). Establishing each such fact (sometimes
referred to as material facts) constitutes a precon-
dition to success. It is apparent that different
causes of action may have one or more material
facts in common. In this case, for example, the
existence of an employment contract is a material
fact common to both the ESA proceeding and to
the appellant’s wrongful dismissal claim in court.
Issue estoppel simply means that once a material
fact such as a valid employment contract is found
to exist (or not to exist) by a court or tribunal of
competent jurisdiction, whether on the basis of evi-
dence or admissions, the same issue cannot be
relitigated in subsequent proceedings between the
same parties. The estoppel, in other words, extends
to the issues of fact, law, and mixed fact and law
490


that are necessarily bound up with the determina-
tion of that “issue” in the prior proceeding.
55
requirement is satisfied. In the appellant’s wrong-
ful dismissal action, she is claiming $300,000 in
unpaid commissions. This puts in issue the same
entitlement as was refused her in the ESA proceed-
ing. One or more of the factual or legal issues
essential to this entitlement were necessarily deter-
mined against her in the earlier ESA proceeding. If
issue estoppel applies, it prevents her from assert-
ing that these adverse findings ought now to be
found in her favour.
(b) That the Judicial Decision Which Is Said to
Create the Estoppel Was Final
56
prior decision be “judicial” (as opposed to admin-
istrative or legislative) is satisfied in this case.
57
Appeal that the employee not having taken advan-
tage of the internal review procedure, the decision
of the ESA officer was final for the purposes of the
Act and therefore capable in the normal course of
events of giving rise to an estoppel.
58
Harelkin, supra, the appellant had no right of
appeal. She could merely make a request to the
ESA Director for a review by an ESA adjudicator.
While this may be a factor in the exercise of the
discretion to deny issue estoppel, it does not affect
the finality of the ESA decision. The appellant
could fairly argue on a judicial review application
that unlike Harelkin she had no “adequate alterna-
tive remedy” available to her as of right. The ESA
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


decision must nevertheless be treated as final for
present purposes.
(c) That the Parties to the Judicial Decision or
Their Privies Were the Same Persons as the
Parties to the Proceedings in Which the
Estoppel Is Raised or Their Privies

This requirement assures mutuality. If the limi-
tation did not exist, a stranger to the earlier pro-
ceeding could insist that a party thereto be bound
in subsequent litigation by the findings in the ear-
lier litigation even though the stranger, who
became a party only to the subsequent litigation,
would not be: Machin, supra; Minott v. O’Shanter
Development Co. (1999), 42 O.R. (3d) 321 (C.A.),
per Laskin J.A., at pp. 339-40. The mutuality
requirement was subject to some critical comment
by McEachern C.J.B.C. when sitting as a trial
judge in Saskatoon Credit Union Ltd. v. Central
Park Ent. Ltd. (1988), 22 B.C.L.R. (2d) 89 (S.C.),
at p. 96, and has been substantially modified in
many jurisdictions in the United States: see
Holmested and Watson, supra, at 21§24, and G. D.
Watson, “Duplicative Litigation: Issue Estoppel,
Abuse of Process and the Death of Mutuality”
(1990), 69 Can. Bar Rev. 623.

The concept of “privity” of course is somewhat
elastic. The learned editors of J. Sopinka, S. N.
Lederman and A. W. Bryant in The Law of Evi-
dence in Canada (2nd ed. 1999), at p. 1088 say,
somewhat pessimistically, that “[i]t is impossible
to be categorical about the degree of interest which
will create privity” and that determinations must
be made on a case-by-case basis. In this case, the
parties are identical and the outer limits of “mutu-
ality” and of the “same parties” requirement need
not be further addressed.
492


61
pel are met in this case.

4. The Exercise of the Discretion
62
nevertheless refuse to apply estoppel as a matter of
discretion. There is no doubt that such a discretion
exists. In General Motors of Canada Ltd. v. Naken,
[1983] 1 S.C.R. 72, Estey J. noted, at p. 101, that
in the context of court proceedings “such a discre-
tion must be very limited in application”. In my
view the discretion is necessarily broader in rela-
tion to the prior decisions of administrative tribu-
nals because of the enormous range and diversity
of the structures, mandates and procedures of
administrative decision makers.
63
observed, at para. 32:
It must always be remembered that although the three
requirements for issue estoppel must be satisfied before
it can apply, the fact that they may be satisfied does not
automatically give rise to its application. Issue estoppel
is an equitable doctrine, and as can be seen from the
cases, is closely related to abuse of process. The doc-
trine of issue estoppel is designed as an implement of
justice, and a protection against injustice. It inevitably
calls upon the exercise of a judicial discretion to achieve
fairness according to the circumstances of each case.

Apart from noting parenthetically that estoppel per
rem judicatem is generally considered a common
law doctrine (unlike promissory estoppel which is
clearly equitable in origin), I think this is a correct
statement of the law. Finch J.A.’s dictum was
adopted and applied by the Ontario Court of
Appeal in Schweneke, supra, at paras. 38 and 43:
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


The discretion to refuse to give effect to issue estop-
pel becomes relevant only where the three prerequisites
to the operation of the doctrine exist. . . . The exercise of
the discretion is necessarily case specific and depends
on the entirety of the circumstances. In exercising the
discretion the court must ask — is there something in
the circumstances of this case such that the usual opera-
tion of the doctrine of issue estoppel would work an
injustice?
.

. . . The discretion must respond to the realities of each
case and not to abstract concerns that arise in virtually
every case where the finding relied on to support the
doctrine was made by a tribunal and not a court.
See also Braithwaite, supra, at para. 56.

Courts elsewhere in the Commonwealth apply
similar principles. In Arnold v. National Westmin-
ster Bank plc, [1991] 3 All E.R. 41, the House of
Lords exercised its discretion against the applica-
tion of issue estoppel arising out of an earlier arbi-
tration, per Lord Keith of Kinkel, at p. 50:
One of the purposes of estoppel being to work justice
between the parties, it is open to courts to recognise that
in special circumstances inflexible application of it may
have the opposite result . . . .

In the present case Rosenberg J.A. noted in
passing at pp. 248-49 the possible existence of a
potential discretion but, with respect, he gave it
short shrift. There was no discussion or analysis of
the merits of its exercise. He simply concluded, at
p. 256:
In summary, Ms. Burke did not accord this appellant
natural justice. The appellant’s recourse was to seek
review of Ms. Burke’s decision. She failed to do so.
That decision is binding upon her and her employer.

In my view it was an error of principle not to
address the factors for and against the exercise of
494


the discretion which the court clearly possessed.
This is not a situation where this Court is being
asked by an appellant to substitute its opinion for
that of the motions judge or the Court of Appeal.
The appellant is entitled at some stage to appropri-
ate consideration of the discretionary factors and to
date this has not happened.

67
the same factors listed in Maybrun in connection
with the rule against collateral attack. A similarly
helpful list was proposed by Laskin J.A. in Minott,
supra. The objective is to ensure that the operation
of issue estoppel promotes the orderly administra-
tion of justice but not at the cost of real injustice in
the particular case. Seven factors, discussed below,
are relevant in this case.

(a) The Wording of the Statute from which the
Power to Issue the Administrative Order
Derives

68
vides that:
No civil remedy of an employee against his or her
employer is suspended or affected by this Act. [Empha-
sis added.]

69
Ontario legislature did not intend ESA proceedings
to become an exclusive forum. (Recent amend-
ments to the Act now require an employee to elect
either the ESA procedure or the court. Even prior
to the new amendments, however, a court could
properly conclude that relitigation of an issue
would be an abuse: Rasanen, supra, per Morden
A.C.J.O., at p. 293, Carthy J.A., at p. 288.)
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


While it is generally reasonable for defendants
to expect to be able to move on with their lives
once one set of proceedings — including any
available appeals — has ended in a rejection of lia-
bility, here, the appellant commenced her civil
action against the respondents before the ESA
officer reached a decision (as was clearly author-
ized by the statute at that time). Thus, the respon-
dents were well aware, in law and in fact, that they
were expected to respond to parallel and to some
extent overlapping proceedings.
(b) The Purpose of the Legislation

The focus of an earlier administrative proceed-
ing might be entirely different from that of the sub-
sequent litigation, even though one or more of the
same issues might be implicated. In Bugbusters,
supra, a forestry company was compulsorily
recruited to help fight a forest fire in British
Columbia. It subsequently sought reimbursement
for its expenses under the B.C. Forest Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 140. The expense claim was
allowed despite an allegation that the fire had been
started by a Bugbusters employee who carelessly
discarded his cigarette. (This, if proved, would
have disentitled Bugbusters to reimbursement.)
The Crown later started a $5 million negligence
claim against Bugbusters, for losses occasioned by
the forest fire. Bugbusters invoked issue estoppel.
The court, in the exercise of its discretion, denied
relief. One reason, per Finch J.A., at para. 30, was
that
a final decision on the Crown’s right to recover its
losses was not within the reasonable expectation of
either party at the time of those [reimbursement] pro-
ceedings [under the Forest Act].
A similar point was made in Rasanen, supra, by
Carthy J.A., at p. 290:
It would be unfair to an employee who sought out
immediate and limited relief of $4,000, forsaking dis-
496


covery and representation in doing so, to then say that
he is bound to the result as it affects a claim for ten
times that amount.
A similar qualification is made in the American
Restatement of the Law, Second: Judgments 2d
(1982), vol. 2 § 83(2)(e), which refers to
procedural elements as may be necessary to constitute
the proceeding a sufficient means of conclusively deter-
mining the matter in question, having regard for the
magnitude and complexity of the matter in question, the
urgency with which the matter must be resolved, and the
opportunity of the parties to obtain evidence and formu-
late legal contentions.
72
chose the ESA forum. Counsel for the respondent
justly observed, with some exasperation:
As the record makes clear, Danyluk was represented by
legal counsel prior to, at the time of, and subsequent to
the cessation of her employment. Danyluk and her coun-
sel were well aware of the fact that Danyluk had an ini-
tial choice of forums with respect to her claim for
unpaid commissions and wages. . . .
73
vide a relatively quick and cheap means of resolv-
ing employment disputes. Putting excessive weight
on the ESA decision in terms of issue estoppel
would likely compel the parties in such cases to
mount a full-scale trial-type offence and defence,
thus tending to defeat the expeditious operation of
the ESA scheme as a whole. This would under-
mine fulfilment of the purpose of the legislation.
(c) The Availability of an Appeal
74
tive remedy” issue in judicial review: Harelkin,
supra, at p. 592. Here the employee had no right of
appeal, but the existence of a potential administra-
tive review and her failure to take advantage of it
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


must be counted against her: Susan Shoe Industries
Ltd. v. Ricciardi (1994), 18 O.R. (3d) 660 (C.A.),
at p. 662.

(d) The Safeguards Available to the Parties in
the Administrative Procedure

As already mentioned, quick and expeditious
procedures suitable to accomplish the objectives of
the ESA scheme may simply be inadequate to deal
with complex issues of fact or law. Administrative
bodies, being masters of their own procedures,
may exclude evidence the court thinks probative,
or act on evidence the court considers less than
reliable. If it has done so, this may be a factor in
the exercise of the court’s discretion. Here the
breach of natural justice is a key factor in the
appellant’s favour.

Morden A.C.J.O. pointed out in his concurring
judgment in Rasanen, supra, at p. 295: “I do not
exclude the possibility that deficiencies in the pro-
cedure relating to the first decision could properly
be a factor in deciding whether or not to apply
issue estoppel.” Laskin J.A. made a similar point
in Minott, supra, at pp. 341-42.

(e) The Expertise of the Administrative Deci-
sion Maker

In this case the ESA officer was a non-legally
trained individual asked to decide a potentially
complex issue of contract law. The rough-and-
ready approach suitable to getting things done in
the vast majority of ESA claims is not the exper-
tise required here. A similar factor operates with
respect to the rule against collateral attack
(Maybrun, supra, at para. 50):
498


. . . where an attack on an order is based on considera-
tions which are foreign to an administrative appeal
tribunal’s expertise or raison d’être, this suggests,
although it is not conclusive in itself, that the legislature
did not intend to reserve the exclusive authority to rule
on the validity of the order to that tribunal.

(f) The Circumstances Giving Rise to the Prior
Administrative Proceedings
78
invoked the ESA procedure at a time of personal
vulnerability with her dismissal looming. It is
unlikely the legislature intended a summary proce-
dure for smallish claims to become a barrier to
closer consideration of more substantial claims.
(The legislature’s subsequent reduction of the
monetary limit of an ESA claim to $10,000 is con-
sistent with this view.) As Laskin J.A. pointed out
in Minott, supra, at pp. 341-42:
. . . employees apply for benefits when they are most
vulnerable, immediately after losing their job. The
urgency with which they must invariably seek relief
compromises their ability to adequately put forward
their case for benefits or to respond to the case against
them . . . .
79
be said that the appellant with or without legal
advice, included in her ESA claim the $300,000
commissions, and she must shoulder at least part
of the responsibility for her resulting difficulties.
(g) The Potential Injustice
80
should stand back and, taking into account the
entirety of the circumstances, consider whether
application of issue estoppel in the particular case
would work an injustice. Rosenberg J.A. con-
cluded that the appellant had received neither
notice of the respondent’s allegation nor an oppor-
tunity to respond. He was thus confronted with the
[2001] 2 R.C.S.


problem identified by Jackson J.A., dissenting, in
Iron v. Saskatchewan (Minister of the Environment
& Public Safety), [1993] 6 W.W.R. 1 (Sask. C.A.),
at p. 21:
The doctrine of res judicata, being a means of doing jus-
tice between the parties in the context of the adversarial
system, carries within its tenets the seeds of injustice,
particularly in relation to issues of allowing parties to be
heard.
Whatever the appellant’s various procedural mis-
takes in this case, the stubborn fact remains that
her claim to commissions worth $300,000 has sim-
ply never been properly considered and adjudi-
cated.

On considering the cumulative effect of the
foregoing factors it is my view that the Court in its
discretion should refuse to apply issue estoppel in
this case.
V. Disposition

I would therefore allow the appeal with costs
throughout.

Appeal allowed with costs.

Solicitors for the appellant: Lang Michener,
Toronto.

Solicitors for the respondents: Heenan Blaikie,
Toronto.
