629
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


Gordon Garland Appellant

v.

Enbridge Gas Distribution Inc.,
previously known as Consumers’ Gas
Company Limited Respondent




and

Attorney General of Canada, Attorney
General for Saskatchewan, Toronto
Hydro-Electric System Limited, Law
Foundation of Ontario and Union Gas
Limited Interveners

Indexed as: Garland v. Consumers’ Gas Co.
Neutral citation: 2004 SCC 25.
File No.: 29052.
2003: October 9; 2004: April 22.
Present: Iacobucci, Major, Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel,
Deschamps and Fish JJ.

ON APPEAL FROM THE COURT OF APPEAL FOR
ONTARIO
   Restitution — Unjust enrichment — Late payment
penalty — Customers of regulated gas utility claiming
restitution for unjust enrichment arising from late payment
 penalties levied by utility in excess of interest limit
prescribed by s. 347 of Criminal Code — Whether customers
 have claim for unjust enrichment — Defences that
can be mounted by utility to resist claim — Whether other
ancillary orders necessary.
    The respondent gas utility, whose rates and payment
policies are governed by the Ontario Energy Board
(“OEB”), bills its customers on a monthly basis, and
each bill includes a due date for the payment of current
charges. Customers who do not pay by the due date incur
a late payment penalty (“LPP”) calculated at five percent
of the unpaid charges for that month. The LPP is a one-
time penalty, and does not compound or increase over
time. The appellant and his wife paid approximately $75
in LPP charges between 1983 and 1995. The appellant
630


commenced a class action seeking restitution for unjust
enrichment of LPP charges received by the respondent in
violation of s. 347 of the Criminal Code. He also sought
a preservation order. In a previous appeal to this Court, it
was held that charging the LPPs amounted to charging a
criminal rate of interest under s. 347 and the matter was
remitted back to the trial court for further consideration.
As the case raised no factual dispute, the parties brought




cross-motions for summary judgment. The motions
judge granted the respondent’s motion for summary
judgment, finding that the action was a collateral attack
on the OEB’s orders. The Court of Appeal disagreed, but
dismissed the appellant’s appeal on the grounds that his
unjust enrichment claim could not be made out.
    Held: The appeal should be allowed. The respondent
is ordered to repay LPPs collected from the appellant in
excess of the interest limit stipulated in s. 347 of the Code
after the action was commenced in 1994 in an amount to
be determined by the trial judge.
   The test for unjust enrichment has three elements:
(1) an enrichment of the defendant; (2) a corresponding
deprivation of the plaintiff; and (3) an absence of juristic
reason for the enrichment. The proper approach to the
juristic reason analysis is in two parts. The plaintiff must
show that no juristic reason from an established category
exists to deny recovery. The established categories
include a contract, a disposition of law, a donative intent,
and other valid common law, equitable or statutory obligations
. If there is no juristic reason from an established
category, then the plaintiff has made out a prima facie
case. The prima facie case is rebuttable, however, where
the defendant can show that there is another reason to
deny recovery. Courts should have regard at this point to
two factors: the reasonable expectations of the parties and
public policy considerations.
    Here, the appellant has a claim for restitution. The
respondent received the monies represented by the LPPs
and had that money available for use in the carrying on
of its business. The transfer of those funds constitutes a
benefit to the respondent. The parties are agreed that the
second prong of the test has been satisfied. With respect
to the third prong, the only possible juristic reason from
an established category that could justify the enrichment
631
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


in this case is the existence of the OEB orders creating the
LPPs under the “disposition of law” category. The OEB
orders, however, do not constitute a juristic reason for
the enrichment because they are inoperative to the extent
of their conflict with s. 347 of the Criminal Code. The
appellant has thus made out a prima facie case for unjust
enrichment.




    The respondent’s reliance on the orders is relevant
when determining the reasonable expectations of the
parties at the rebuttal stage of the juristic reason analysis
even though it would not provide a defence if the respondent
 was charged under s. 347 of the Code. However, the
overriding public policy consideration in this case is the
fact that the LPPs were collected in contravention of the
Criminal Code. As a matter of public policy, criminals
should not be permitted to keep the proceeds of their
crime. In weighing these considerations, the respondent’s
reliance on the inoperative OEB orders from 1981-1994,
prior to the commencement of this action, provides a
juristic reason for the enrichment. After the action was
commenced and the respondent was put on notice that
there was a serious possibility its LPPs violated the
Criminal Code, it was no longer reasonable to rely on the
OEB rate orders to authorize the LPPs. Given that conclusion
, it is only necessary to consider the respondent’s
defences for the period after 1994.

   The respondent cannot avail itself of any defence. The
change of position defence is not available to a defendant
who is a wrongdoer. Since the respondent in this case was
enriched by its own criminal misconduct, it should not be
permitted to avail itself of the defence. Section 18 (now s.
25) of the Ontario Energy Board Act should be read down
so as to exclude protection from civil liability damage
arising out of Criminal Code violations. As a result, the
defence does not apply in this case and it is not necessary
to consider the constitutionality of the section.

    This action does not constitute an impermissible collateral
 attack on the OEB’s orders. The OEB does not
have exclusive jurisdiction over this dispute, which is a
private law matter under the competence of civil courts,
nor does it have jurisdiction to order the remedy sought
by the appellant. Moreover, the specific object of the
action is not to invalidate or render inoperative the OEB’s
orders, but rather to recover money that was illegally
632


collected by the respondent as a result of OEB orders. In
order for the regulated industries defence to be available
to the respondent, Parliament needed to have indicated,
either expressly or by necessary implication, that s. 347
of the Code granted leeway to those acting pursuant to a
valid provincial regulatory scheme. Section 347 does not
contain any such indication.




    The de facto doctrine does not apply in this case
because it only attaches to government and its officials
in order to protect and maintain the rule of law and the
authority of government. An extension of the doctrine to
a private corporation regulated by a government authority
is not supported by the case law and does not further the
doctrine’s underlying purpose.
   A preservation order is not appropriate in this case.
The respondent has ceased to collect the LPPs at a criminal
 rate, so there would be no future LPPs to which a
preservation order could attach. Even with respect to the
LPPs paid between 1994 and the present, a preservation
order should not be granted because it would serve no
practical purpose, because the appellant has not satisfied
the criteria in the Ontario Rules of Civil Procedure, and
because Amax can be distinguished from this case. A declaration
 that the LPPs need not be paid would similarly
serve no practical purpose and should not be made.
Cases Cited
   Applied: Peter v. Beblow, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 980;
explained: Pettkus v. Becker, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 834; Peel
(Regional Municipality) v. Canada, [1992] 3 S.C.R. 762;
referred to: Garland v. Consumers’ Gas Co., [1998] 3
S.C.R. 112; Sprint Canada Inc. v. Bell Canada (1997),
79 C.P.R. (3d) 31; Ontario Hydro v. Kelly (1998), 39
O.R. (3d) 107; Mahar v. Rogers Cablesystems Ltd.
(1995), 25 O.R. (3d) 690; Berardinelli v. Ontario
Housing Corp., [1979] 1 S.C.R. 275; Sharwood & Co.
v. Municipal Financial Corp. (2001), 53 O.R. (3d) 470;
Rural Municipality of Storthoaks v. Mobil Oil Canada,
Ltd., [1976] 2 S.C.R. 147; RBC Dominion Securities
Inc. v. Dawson (1994), 111 D.L.R. (4th) 230; Rathwell
v. Rathwell, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 436; Reference re Goods
and Services Tax, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 445; Mack v. Canada
(Attorney General) (2002), 60 O.R. (3d) 737; Multiple
Access Ltd. v. McCutcheon, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 161; M & D
Farm Ltd. v. Manitoba Agricultural Credit Corp., [1999]
2 S.C.R. 961; Transport North American Express Inc.
v. New Solutions Financial Corp., [2004] 1 S.C.R. 249,
633
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


2004 SCC 7; Oldfield v. Transamerica Life Insurance
Co. of Canada, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 742, 2002 SCC 22;
Lipkin Gorman v. Karpnale Ltd., [1992] 4 All E.R. 512;
Toronto (City) v. C.U.P.E., Local 79, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 77,
2003 SCC 63; Wilson v. The Queen, [1983] 2 S.C.R. 594;
R. v. Litchfield, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 333; Attorney General
of Canada v. Law Society of British Columbia, [1982]
2 S.C.R. 307; R. v. Jorgensen, [1995] 4 S.C.R. 55;




Reference re Manitoba Language Rights, [1985] 1 S.C.R.
721; Amax Potash Ltd. v. Government of Saskatchewan,
[1977] 2 S.C.R. 576.
Statutes and Regulations Cited
Civil Code of Quebec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, arts. 1493,
   1494.
Constitution Act, 1867, ss. 91(19), (27), 92(13).
Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, ss. 15, 347.
Municipal Franchises Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M.55.
Ontario Energy Board Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. O.13, s. 18.
Ontario Energy Board Act, 1998, S.O. 1998, c. 15, Sch.
   B, s. 25.
Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, r.
   45.02.
Authors Cited
Constantineau, Albert. A Treatise on the De Facto
   Doctrine. Toronto: Canada Law Book, 1910.
Fridman, Gerald Henry Louis. Restitution, 2nd ed.
   Scarborough, Ont.: Carswell, 1992.
Goff of Chieveley, Robert Goff, Baron, and Gareth
   Jones. The Law of Restitution, 6th ed. London: Sweet
   & Maxwell, 2002.
Lange, Donald J. The Doctrine of Res Judicata in
   Canada. Markham, Ont.: Butterworths, 2000.
Maddaugh, Peter D., and John D. McCamus. The Law of
   Restitution. Aurora, Ont.: Canada Law Book, 1990.
McInnes, Mitchell. “Unjust Enrichment — Restitution
   — Absence of Juristic Reason: Campbell v. Campbell”
   (2000), 79 Can. Bar Rev. 459.
Smith, Lionel. “The Mystery of ‘Juristic Reason’”
   (2000), 12 S.C.L.R. (2d) 211.
Ziegel, Jacob S. “Criminal Usury, Class Actions and
   Unjust Enrichment in Canada” (2002), 18 J. Cont.
   L. 121.
   APPEAL from a judgment of the Ontario
Court of Appeal (2001), 57 O.R. (3d) 127, 208
D.L.R. (4th) 494, 152 O.A.C. 244, 19 B.L.R. (3d)
10, [2001] O.J. No. 4651 (QL), affirming a decision
 of the Superior Court of Justice (2000), 185
    634


    D.L.R. (4th) 536, [2000] O.J. No. 1354 (QL).
    Appeal allowed.

      Michael McGowan, Barbara L. Grossman,
    Dorothy Fong and Christopher D. Woodbury, for the
    appellant.

      Fred D. Cass, John D. McCamus and John J.




    Longo, for the respondent.

       Christopher M. Rupar, for the intervener the
    Attorney General of Canada.

      Thomson Irvine, for the intervener the Attorney
    General for Saskatchewan.

       Alan H. Mark and Kelly L. Friedman, for the
    intervener Toronto Hydro-Electric System Limited.

      Mark M. Orkin, Q.C., for the intervener the Law
    Foundation of Ontario.

       Patricia D. S. Jackson and M. Paul Michell, for
    the intervener Union Gas Limited.

         The judgment of the Court was delivered by
1
       Iacobucci J. — At issue in this appeal is a
    claim by customers of a regulated utility for restitution
     for unjust enrichment arising from late payment
     penalties levied by the utility in excess of the
    interest limit prescribed by s. 347 of the Criminal
    Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46. More specifically, the
    issues raised include the necessary ingredients to a
    claim for unjust enrichment, the defences that can
    be mounted to resist the claim, and whether other
    ancillary orders are necessary.
2
      For the reasons that follow, I am of the view to
    uphold the appellant’s claim for unjust enrichment
    and therefore would allow the appeal.
    I.
3
      The respondent Consumers’ Gas Company
    Limited, now known as Enbridge Gas Distribution
635
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


Inc., is a regulated utility which provides natural gas
to commercial and residential customers throughout
 Ontario. Its rates and payment policies are
governed by the Ontario Energy Board (“OEB” or
“Board”) pursuant to the Ontario Energy Board Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. O.13 (“OEBA”), and the Municipal
Franchises Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M.55. The respondent




 cannot sell gas or charge for gas-related services
except in accordance with rate orders issued by the
Board.
4
   Consumers’ Gas bills its customers on a monthly
basis, and each bill includes a due date for the payment
 of current charges. Customers who do not pay
by the due date incur a late payment penalty (“LPP”)
calculated at five percent of the unpaid charges for
that month. The LPP is a one-time penalty, and does
not compound or increase over time.
5
   The LPP was implemented in 1975 following a
series of rate hearings conducted by the OEB. In
granting Consumers’ Gas’s application to impose
the penalty, the Board noted that the primary purpose
 of the LPP is to encourage customers to pay
their bills promptly, thereby reducing the cost to
Consumers’ Gas of carrying accounts receivable.
The Board also held that such costs, along with
any special collection costs arising from late payments
, should be borne by the customers who
cause them to be incurred, rather than by the customer
 base as a whole. In approving a flat penalty
of five percent, the OEB rejected the alternative
course of imposing a daily interest charge on over-
due accounts. The Board reasoned that an interest
 charge would not provide sufficient incentive
to pay by a named date, would give little weight
to collection costs, and might seem overly compli-
cated. The Board recognized that if a bill is paid
very soon after the due date, the penalty would, if
calculated as an interest charge, be a very high rate
of interest. However, it noted that customers could
avoid such a charge by paying their bills on time,
and that, in any event, in the case of the average
    636


    bill the dollar amount of the penalty would not be
    very large.
6
       The appellant Gordon Garland is a resident of




    Ontario and has been a Consumers’ Gas customer
    since 1983. He and his wife paid approximately $75
    in LPP charges between 1983 and 1995. In a class
    action on behalf of over 500,000 Consumers’ Gas
    customers, Garland asserted that the LPPs violate s.
    347 of the Criminal Code. That case also reached
    the Supreme Court of Canada, which held that
    charging the LPPs amounted to charging a criminal
    rate of interest under s. 347 and remitted the matter
    back to the trial court for further consideration
    (Garland v. Consumers’ Gas Co., [1998] 3 S.C.R.
    112 (“Garland No. 1”)). Both parties have now
    brought cross-motions for summary judgment.
7
       The appellant now seeks restitution for unjust
    enrichment of LPP charges received by the respondent
     in violation of s. 347 of the Code. He also seeks
    a preservation order requiring Consumers’ Gas to
    hold LPPs paid during the pendency of the litigation
    subject to possible repayment.
8
       The motions judge granted the respondent’s
    motion for summary judgment, finding that the
    action was a collateral attack on the OEB order. He
    dismissed the application for a preservation order. A
    majority of the Court of Appeal disagreed with the
    motions judge’s reasons, but dismissed the appeal
    on the grounds that the appellant’s unjust enrichment
     claim could not be made out.

    II. Relevant Statutory Provisions
9
       18. An order of the Board is a good and sufficient
    defence to any proceeding brought or taken against any
637
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


person in so far as the act or omission that is the subject
of the proceeding is in accordance with the order.

Ontario Energy Board Act, 1998, S.O. 1998, c. 15,
Sch. B

    25. An order of the Board is a good and sufficient
defence to any proceeding brought or taken against any




person in so far as the act or omission that is the subject
of the proceeding is in accordance with the order.

Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46

   15. No person shall be convicted of an offence in
respect of an act or omission in obedience to the laws for
the time being made and enforced by persons in de facto
possession of the sovereign power in and over the place
where the act or omission occurs.
   347. (1) Notwithstanding any Act of Parliament, every
one who
   (a) enters into an agreement or arrangement to receive
   interest at a criminal rate, or
   (b) receives a payment or partial payment of interest
   at a criminal rate,
is guilty of
   (c) an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment
    for a term not exceeding five years, or
   (d) an offence punishable on summary conviction and
   is liable to a fine not exceeding twenty-five thousand
   dollars or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
   six months or to both.

III. Judicial History

A. Ontario Superior Court of Justice (2000), 185
   D.L.R. (4th) 536

10
   As this case raised no factual disputes, all parties
 agreed that summary judgment was the proper
procedure on the motion. Winkler J. found that the
appellant’s claim could not succeed in law and that
there was no serious issue to be tried. In so finding
, he held that the “regulated industries defence”
was not a complete defence to the claim. On his
reading of the relevant case law, the dominant
consideration was whether the express statutory
     638


     language afforded a degree of flexibility to provincial
     regulators. Section 347 affords no such flexibility,
     so the defence is not available.
11




        Nor, in Winkler J.’s view, did s. 15 of the Criminal
     Code act as a defence. Section 15 was a provision
     of very limited application, originally enacted to
     ensure that persons serving the Monarch de facto
     could not be tried for treason for remaining faithful
     to the unsuccessful claimant to the throne. While it
     could have a more contemporary application, it was
     limited on its face to actions or omissions occurring
      pursuant to the authority of a sovereign power.
     As the OEB was not a sovereign power, it did not
     apply.
12
         Winkler J. found that the proposed action was a
     collateral attack on the OEB’s orders. The OEBA
     indicated repeatedly that the OEB has exclusive
     control over matters within its jurisdiction. In addition
     , interested parties were welcome to participate
     in OEB hearings, and OEB orders were reviewable.
     The appellant did not avail himself of any of these
     opportunities, choosing instead to challenge the
     validity of the OEB orders in the courts. Winkler
     J. found that, unless attacked directly, OEB orders
     are valid and binding upon the respondent and its
     consumers. The OEB was not a party to the instant
     proceeding and its orders were not before the court.
     Winkler J. noted that the setting of rates is a bal-
     ancing exercise, with LPPs being one factor under
     consideration. Applying Sprint Canada Inc. v. Bell
     Canada (1997), 79 C.P.R. (3d) 31 (Ont. Ct. (Gen.
     Div.)), Ontario Hydro v. Kelly (1998), 39 O.R. (3d)
     107 (Gen. Div.), and Mahar v. Rogers Cablesystems
     Ltd. (1995), 25 O.R. (3d) 690 (Gen. Div.), Winkler
     J. found that the instant action, although framed as
     a private dispute between two contractual parties,
     was in reality an impermissible collateral attack
     on the validity of OEB orders. It would be inap-
     propriate for the court to determine matters that fall
     squarely within the OEB’s jurisdiction. Moreover,
     this Court’s decision in Garland No. 1 with respect
639
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


to s. 347 provided the OEB with ample legal guid-
ance to deal with the matter.
13




    In case he was incorrect in that finding, Winkler
J. went on to find that s. 18 of the OEBA provided
a complete defence to the proposed action. He held
that s. 18 was constitutionally valid because it did
not interfere with Parliament’s jurisdiction over
interest and the criminal law, or, to the extent that
it did, the interference was incidental. Although the
respondent did not strictly comply with the OEB
order in that it waived LPPs for some customers,
this did not preclude the respondent from relying on
s. 18.
14
   In case that finding was also mistaken, Winkler
J. went on to consider whether the appellant’s claim
for restitution was valid. The parties had conceded
that the appellant had suffered a deprivation, and
Winkler J. was satisfied that the respondent had
received a benefit. However, he found that the
OEB’s rate order constituted a valid juristic reason
for the respondent’s enrichment.
15
   Having reached those conclusions, Winkler J.
declined to make a preservation order, as requested
by the appellant, allowed the respondent’s motion
for summary judgment and dismissed the appellant
’s action. By endorsement, he ordered costs
against the appellant.

B. Ontario Court of Appeal (2001), 208 D.L.R.
   (4th) 494
16
   McMurtry C.J.O., for the majority, found that
Winkler J. was incorrect in finding that there had
been an impermissible collateral attack on a decision
 of the OEB because the appellant was not
challenging the merits or legality of the OEB order
or attempting to raise a matter already dealt with
by the OEB. Rather, the proposed class action
was based on the principles of unjust enrichment
and raised issues over which the OEB had no
     640


     jurisdiction. As such, the courts had jurisdiction
     over the proposed class action.
17
        McMurtry C.J.O. further found that s. 25 of the
     1998 OEBA (the equivalent provision to s. 18 of the
     1990 OEBA) did not provide grounds to dismiss the




     appellant’s action. He did not agree that the respondent
     ’s failure to comply strictly with the OEB orders
     made s. 25 inapplicable. Instead, he found that while
     s. 25 provides a defence to any proceedings in so
     far as the act or omission at issue is in accordance
     with the OEB order, legislative provisions restrict-
     ing citizen’s rights of action attract strict construction
      (Berardinelli v. Ontario Housing Corp., [1979]
     1 S.C.R. 275). The legislature could not reasonably
     be believed to have contemplated that an OEB order
     could mandate criminal conduct, and even wording
     as broad as that found in s. 25 could not provide a
     defence to an action for restitution arising from an
     OEB order authorizing criminal conduct. He noted
     that this decision was based on the principles of statutory
      interpretation, not on the federal paramountcy
     doctrine.
18
        Section 15 of the Criminal Code did not provide
     the respondent with a defence, either. It was of limited
      application and is largely irrelevant in modern
     times. As for the “regulated industries defence”, it
     did not apply because the case law did not indicate
     that a company operating in a regulatory industry
     could act directly contrary to the Criminal Code.
19
        Nonetheless, McMurtry C.J.O. held that the
     appellant’s unjust enrichment claim could not be
     made out. It had been conceded that the appellant
      suffered a deprivation, but McMurtry C.J.O.
     held that the appellant failed to establish the other
     two elements of the claim for unjust enrichment.
     While payment of money will normally be a benefit,
     McMurtry C.J.O. found that the payment of the late
     penalties in this case did not confer a benefit on the
641
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


respondent. Taking the “straightforward economic
approach” to the first two elements of unjust enrichment
, as recommended in Peter v. Beblow, [1993]
1 S.C.R. 980, McMurtry C.J.O. noted that the OEB
sets rates with a view to meeting the respondent’s
overall revenue requirements. If the revenue available
 from LPPs had been set lower, the other rates




would have been set higher. Therefore, the receipt of
the LPPs was not an enrichment capable of giving
rise to a restitutionary claim.

20
   In case that conclusion was wrong, McMurtry
C.J.O. went on to find that there was a juristic
reason for any presumed enrichment. Under this
aspect of the test, moral and policy questions were
open for consideration, and it was necessary to
consider what was fair to both the plaintiff and the
defendant. It was therefore necessary to consider
the statutory regime within which the respondent
operated. McMurtry C.J.O. noted that the respondent
 was required by statute to apply the LPPs; it had
been ordered to collect them and they were taken
into account when the OEB made its rate orders. He
found that it would be contrary to the equities in this
case to require the respondent to repay all the LPP
charges collected since 1981. Such an order would
affect all of the respondent’s customers, including
the vast majority who consistently pay on time.
21
   The appellant argued that a preservation order
was required even if his arguments on restitution
were not successful because he could still be successful
 in arguing that the respondent could not
enforce payment of the late penalties. As he had
found no basis for ordering restitution, McMurtry
C.J.O. saw no reason to make a preservation order.
Moreover, the order requested would serve no practical
 purpose because it gave the respondent the
right to spend the monies at stake. He dismissed the
appeal and the appellant’s action. In so doing, he
agreed with the motions judge that the appellant’s
     642


     claims for declaratory and injunctive relief should
     not be granted.
22
        As to costs, McMurtry C.J.O. found that there
     were several considerations that warranted over-




     turning the order that the appellant pay the respondent
     ’s costs. First, the order required him to pay the
     costs of his successful appeal to the Supreme Court
     of Canada. Second, even though the respondent
     was ultimately successful, it failed on two of the
     defences it raised at the motions stage and three of
     the defences it raised at the Court of Appeal. Third,
     the proceedings raised novel issues. McMurtry
     C.J.O. found that each party should bear its own
     costs.
23
        Borins J.A., writing in dissent, was of the opinion
     that the appeal should be allowed. He agreed with
     most of McMurtry C.J.O.’s reasons, but found that
     the plaintiff class was entitled to restitution. In his
     opinion, the motions judge’s finding that the LPPs
     had enriched the respondent by causing it to have
     more money than it had before was supported by the
     evidence and the authorities. Absent material error,
     he held, it was not properly reviewable.
24
        However, Borins J.A. found that the motions
     judge had erred in law in finding that there was
     a juristic reason for the enrichment. The motions
     judge had failed to consider the effect of the
     Supreme Court of Canada decision that the charges
     amount to interests at a criminal rate and that s.
     347 of the Criminal Code prohibits the receipt of
     such interest. As a result of this decision, Borins
     J.A. felt that the rate orders ceased to have any
     legal effect and could not provide a juristic reason
     for the enrichment. A finding that the rate orders
     constituted a juristic reason for contravening s.
     347 also allowed orders of a provincial regulatory
      authority to override federal criminal law and
     removed a substantial reason for compliance with
     s. 347. Thus, he held that allowing the respondent
643
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


to retain the LPPs was contrary to the federal paramountcy
 doctrine.

25
   According to Borins J.A., finding the OEB
orders to constitute a juristic reason would also be




contrary to the authorities which have applied s.
347 in the context of commercial obligations. This
line of cases required consideration of when restitution
 should have been ordered and for what portion
 of the amount paid. Finally, it would allow the
respondent to profit from its own wrongdoing.
26
    Borins J.A. was not sympathetic to the respondent
’s claims that its change of position should allow
it to keep the money it had collected in contravention
 of s. 347, even if it could have recovered the
same amount of money on an altered rate structure.
He also noted that, in his opinion, the issue of recov-
erability should have been considered in the context
of the class action, not on the basis of the represent-
ative plaintiff’s claim for $75. Borins J.A. would
have allowed the appeal, set aside the judgment
dismissing the appellant’s claim, granted partial
summary judgment, and dismissed the respondent’s
motion for summary judgment. The appellant would
have been required to proceed to trial with respect
to damages. He would also have declared that the
charging and receipt of LPPs by the respondent vio-
lates s. 347(1)(b) of the Criminal Code and that the
LPPs need not be paid by the appellant, and would
have ordered that the respondent repay the LPPs
received from the appellant, as determined by the
trial judge. He would also have ordered costs against
the respondent.
27
  It should be noted that on January 9, 2003,
McLachlin C.J. stated the following constitutional
question:
Are s. 18 of the Ontario Energy Board Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. O.13, and s. 25 of the Ontario Energy Board Act, 1998,
S.O. 1998, c. 15, Sched. B, constitutionally inoperative
     644


     by reason of the paramountcy of s. 347 of the Criminal
     Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46?
     As will be clear from the reasons below, I have
     found it unnecessary to answer the constitutional
     question.




     IV. Issues
28
     1. Does the appellant have a claim for restitution?

           (a) Was the respondent enriched?

           (b) Is there a juristic reason for the enrichment
           ?

     2. Can the respondent avail itself of any defence?

           (a) Does the change of position defence
           apply?

           (b) Does s. 18 (now s. 25) of the OEBA (“s.
           18/25”) shield the respondent from liability?

           (c) Is the appellant engaging in a collateral
           attack on the orders of the Board?

           (d) Does the “regulated industries” defence
           exonerate the respondent?

           (e) Does the de facto doctrine exonerate the
           respondent?

     3. Other orders sought by the appellant

           (a) Should this Court make a preservation
           order?

           (b) Should this Court make a declaration that
           the LPPs need not be paid?

           (c) What order should this Court make as to
           costs?
645
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


V. Analysis
29
   My analysis will proceed as follows. First, I will
assess the appellant’s claim in unjust enrichment.
Second, I will determine whether the respondent can
avail itself of any defences to the appellant’s claim.
Finally, I will address the other orders sought by the




appellant.

A. Unjust Enrichment
30
   As a general matter, the test for unjust enrichment
 is well established in Canada. The cause of
action has three elements: (1) an enrichment of the
defendant; (2) a corresponding deprivation of the
plaintiff; and (3) an absence of juristic reason for the
enrichment (Pettkus v. Becker, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 834,
at p. 848; Peel (Regional Municipality) v. Canada,
[1992] 3 S.C.R. 762, at p. 784). In this case, the parties
 are agreed that the second prong of the test has
been satisfied. I will thus address the first and third
prongs of the test in turn.

   (a) Enrichment of the Defendant
31
   In Peel, supra, at p. 790, McLachlin J. (as she
then was) noted that the word “enrichment” con-
notes a tangible benefit which has been conferred on
the defendant. This benefit, she writes, can be either
a positive benefit, such as the payment of money, or
a negative benefit, for example, sparing the defendant
 an expense which he or she would otherwise
have incurred. In general, moral and policy arguments
 have not been considered under this head
of the test. Rather, as McLachlin J. wrote in Peter,
supra, at p. 990, “[t]his Court has consistently taken
a straightforward economic approach to the first two
elements of the test for unjust enrichment”. Other
considerations, she held, belong more appropriately
 under the third element — absence of juristic
reason.
32
   In this case, the transactions at issue are payments
of money by late payers to the respondent. It seems
to me that, as such, under the “straightforward
     646


     economic approach” to the benefit analysis, this element
      is satisfied. Winkler J. followed this approach
     and was satisfied that the respondent had received a
     benefit. “Simply stated”, he wrote at para. 95, “as a
     result of each LPP received by Consumers’ Gas, the
     company has more money than it had previously and
     accordingly is enriched.”




33
         The majority of the Court of Appeal for Ontario
     disagreed. McMurtry C.J.O. found that while payment
      of money would normally be a benefit, it
     was not in this case. He claimed to be applying the
     “straightforward economic approach” as recommended
      in Peter, supra, but accepted the respondent
     ’s argument that because of the rate structure
     of the OEB, the respondent had not actually been
     enriched. Because LPPs were part of a scheme
     designed to recover the respondent’s overall revenue
     , any increase in LPPs was off-set by a corresponding
      decrease in regular rates. Thus McMurtry
     C.J.O. concluded, “[t]he enrichment that follows
      from the receipt of LPPs is passed on to all
     [Consumers’ Gas] customers in the form of lower
     gas delivery rates” (para. 65). As a result, the real
     beneficiary of the scheme is not the respondent but
     is rather all of the respondent’s customers.
34
         In his dissent, Borins J.A. disagreed with this
     analysis. He would have held that where there is
     payment of money, there is little controversy over
     whether or not a benefit was received and since a
     payment of money was received in this case, a benefit
      was conferred on the respondent.
35
        The respondent submits that it is not enough that
     the plaintiff has made a payment; rather, it must
     also be shown that the defendant is “in possession
     of a benefit”. It argues that McMurtry C.J.O. had
     correctly held that the benefit had effectively been
     passed on to the respondent’s customers, so the
     respondent could not be said to have retained the
     benefit. The appellant, on the other hand, maintains
647
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


that the “straightforward economic approach” from
Peter, supra, should be applied and any other moral
or policy considerations should be considered at the
juristic reason stage of the analysis.
36
   I agree with the analysis of Borins J.A. on this




point. The law on this question is relatively clear.
Where money is transferred from plaintiff to defendant
, there is an enrichment. Transfer of money so
clearly confers a benefit that it is the main example
 used in the case law and by commentators of a
transaction that meets the threshold for a benefit (see
Peel, supra, at p. 790; Sharwood & Co. v. Municipal
Financial Corp. (2001), 53 O.R. (3d) 470 (C.A.), at
p. 478; P. D. Maddaugh and J. D. McCamus, The
Law of Restitution (1990), at p. 38; Lord Goff and
G. Jones, The Law of Restitution (6th ed. 2002), at
p. 18). There simply is no doubt that Consumers’
Gas received the monies represented by the LPPs
and had that money available for use in the carrying
on of its business. The availability of those funds
constitutes a benefit to Consumers’ Gas. We are not,
at this stage, concerned with what happened to this
benefit in the ongoing operation of the regulatory
scheme.
37
   While the respondent rightly points out that the
language of “received and retained” has been used
with respect to the benefit requirement (see, for
example, Peel, supra, at p. 788), it does not make
sense that it is a requirement that the benefit be
retained permanently. The case law does, in fact,
recognize that it might be unfair to award restitution
 in cases where the benefit was not retained,
but it does so after the three steps for a claim in
unjust enrichment have been made out by recogniz-
ing a “change of position” defence (see, for example
, Rural Municipality of Storthoaks v. Mobil Oil
Canada, Ltd., [1976] 2 S.C.R. 147; RBC Dominion
Securities Inc. v. Dawson (1994), 111 D.L.R. (4th)
230 (Nfld. C.A.)). Professor J. S. Ziegel, in his
comment on the Ontario Court of Appeal decision
in this case, “Criminal Usury, Class Actions and
Unjust Enrichment in Canada” (2002), 18 J. Cont.
L. 121, at p. 126, suggests that McMurtry C.J.O.’s
reliance on the regulatory framework of the LPP
     648


     in finding that a benefit was not conferred “was
     really a change of position defence”. I agree with
     this assessment. Whether recovery should be barred
     because the benefit was passed on to the respondent
     ’s other customers ought to be considered under
     the change of position defence.




        (b) Absence of Juristic Reason
        (i) General Principles
38
        In his original formulation of the test for unjust
     enrichment in Rathwell v. Rathwell, [1978] 2 S.C.R.
     436, at p. 455 (adopted in Pettkus, supra, at p. 844),
     Dickson J. (as he then was) held in his minority reasons
      that for an action in unjust enrichment to succeed
     :
     . . . the facts must display an enrichment, a corresponding
     deprivation, and the absence of any juristic reason — such
     as a contract or disposition of law — for the enrichment.
39
        Later formulations of the test by this Court have
     broadened the types of factors that can be considered
      in the context of the juristic reason analysis. In
     Peter, supra, at p. 990, McLachlin J. held that:
     It is at this stage that the court must consider whether the
     enrichment and detriment, morally neutral in themselves,
     are “unjust”.
        . . . The test is flexible, and the factors to be considered
      may vary with the situation before the court.
40
        The “juristic reason” aspect of the test for
     unjust enrichment has been the subject of much
     academic commentary and criticism. Much of the
     discussion arises out of the difference between the
     ways in which the cause of action of unjust enrichment
      is conceptualized in Canada and in England.
     While both Canadian and English causes of action
     require an enrichment of the defendant and a
649
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


corresponding deprivation of the plaintiff, the
Canadian cause of action requires that there be
“an absence of juristic reason for the enrichment”,
while English courts require “that the enrichment
 be unjust” (see discussion in L. Smith, “The
Mystery of ‘Juristic Reason’” (2000), 12 S.C.L.R.
(2d) 211, at pp. 212-13). It is not of great use to




speculate on why Dickson J. in Rathwell, supra,
expressed the third condition as absence of juristic
 reason but I believe that he may have wanted
to ensure that the test for unjust enrichment was
not purely subjective in order to be responsive to
Martland J.’s criticism in his reasons that application
 of the doctrine of unjust enrichment contemplated
 by Dickson J. would require “immeasur-
able judicial discretion” (p. 473). The importance
of avoiding a purely subjective standard was also
stressed by McLachlin J. in her reasons in Peel,
supra, at p. 802, in which she wrote that the application
 of the test for unjust enrichment should not
be “case by case ‘palm tree’ justice”.
41
   Perhaps as a result of these two formulations of
this aspect of the test, Canadian courts and commentators
 are divided in their approach to juristic
 reason. As Borins J.A. notes in his dissent (at
para. 105), while “some judges have taken the
Pettkus formulation literally and have attempted
to decide cases by finding a ‘juristic reason’ for a
defendant’s enrichment, other judges have decided
cases by asking whether the plaintiff has a positive
reason for demanding restitution”. In his article,
“The Mystery of ‘Juristic Reason’”, supra, which
was cited at length by Borins J.A., Professor Smith
suggests that it is not clear whether the requirement
 of “absence of juristic reason” should be
interpreted literally to require that plaintiffs show
the absence of a reason for the defendant to keep
the enrichment or, as in the English model, the
plaintiff must show a reason for reversing the
transfer of wealth. Other commentators have
argued that in fact there is no difference beyond
semantics between the Canadian and English
tests (see, for example, M. McInnes, “Unjust
     650


     Enrichment — Restitution — Absence of Juristic
     Reason: Campbell v. Campbell” (2000), 79 Can.
     Bar Rev. 459).
42




        Professor Smith argues that, if there is in fact a
     distinct Canadian approach to juristic reason, it is
     problematic because it requires the plaintiff to prove
     a negative, namely the absence of a juristic reason.
     Because it is nearly impossible to do this, he suggests
      that Canada would be better off adopting the
     British model where the plaintiff must show a positive
      reason that it would be unjust for the defendant
     to retain the enrichment. In my view, however, there
     is a distinctive Canadian approach to juristic reason
     which should be retained but can be construed in a
     manner that is responsive to Smith’s criticism.
43
     ment is relatively new to Canadian jurisprudence. It
     requires flexibility for courts to expand the categories
      of juristic reasons as circumstances require and
     to deny recovery where to allow it would be inequitable
     . As McLachlin J. wrote in Peel, supra, at
     p. 788, the Court’s approach to unjust enrichment,
     while informed by traditional categories of recovery,
     “is capable, however, of going beyond them, allowing
      the law to develop in a flexible way as required
     to meet changing perceptions of justice”. But at the
     same time there must also be guidelines that offer
     trial judges and others some indication of what the
     boundaries of the cause of action are. The goal is to
     avoid guidelines that are so general and subjective
     that uniformity becomes unattainable.
44
        The parties and commentators have pointed out
     that there is no specific authority that settles this
     question. But recalling that this is an equitable
     remedy that will necessarily involve discretion and
     questions of fairness, I believe that some redefini-
     tion and reformulation is required. Consequently, in
651
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


my view, the proper approach to the juristic reason
analysis is in two parts. First, the plaintiff must show
that no juristic reason from an established category
exists to deny recovery. By closing the list of categories
 that the plaintiff must canvass in order to show
an absence of juristic reason, Smith’s objection to
the Canadian formulation of the test that it required




proof of a negative is answered. The established categories
 that can constitute juristic reasons include
a contract (Pettkus, supra), a disposition of law
(Pettkus, supra), a donative intent (Peter, supra),
and other valid common law, equitable or statutory
 obligations (Peter, supra). If there is no juristic
reason from an established category, then the plaintiff
 has made out a prima facie case under the juristic
 reason component of the analysis.
45
   The prima facie case is rebuttable, however,
where the defendant can show that there is another
reason to deny recovery. As a result, there is a de
facto burden of proof placed on the defendant to
show the reason why the enrichment should be
retained. This stage of the analysis thus provides for
a category of residual defence in which courts can
look to all of the circumstances of the transaction in
order to determine whether there is another reason
to deny recovery.
46
   As part of the defendant’s attempt to rebut, courts
should have regard to two factors: the reasonable
expectations of the parties, and public policy considerations
. It may be that when these factors are
considered, the court will find that a new category
of juristic reason is established. In other cases, a
consideration of these factors will suggest that there
was a juristic reason in the particular circumstances
of a case which does not give rise to a new category
of juristic reason that should be applied in other factual
 circumstances. In a third group of cases, a consideration
 of these factors will yield a determination
that there was no juristic reason for the enrichment.
In the latter cases, recovery should be allowed. The
point here is that this area is an evolving one and
     652


     that further cases will add additional refinements
     and developments.
47
        In my view, this approach to the juristic reason
     analysis is consistent with the general approach to
     unjust enrichment endorsed by McLachlin J. in Peel,
     supra, where she stated that courts must effect a bal-




     ance between the traditional “category” approach
     according to which a claim for restitution will succeed
      only if it falls within an established head of
     recovery, and the modern “principled” approach
     according to which relief is determined with reference
      to broad principles. It is also, as discussed by
     Professor Smith, supra, generally consistent with
     the approach to unjust enrichment found in the civil
     law of Quebec (see, for example, arts. 1493 and
     1494 of the Civil Code of Quebec, S.Q. 1991, c.
     64).
        (ii) Application
48
        In this case, the only possible juristic reason from
     an established category that could be used to justify
     the enrichment is the existence of the OEB orders
     creating the LPPs under the “disposition of law” category
     . The OEB orders, however, do not constitute
     a juristic reason for the enrichment because they are
     rendered inoperative to the extent of their conflict
     with s. 347 of the Criminal Code. The plaintiff has
     thus made out a prima facie case for unjust enrichment
     .
49
     egory of juristic reason. In Rathwell, supra, Dickson
     J. gave as examples of juristic reasons “a contract
      or disposition of law” (p. 455). In Reference
     re Goods and Services Tax, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 445
     (“GST Reference”), Lamer C.J. held that a valid
     statute is a juristic reason barring recovery in unjust
     enrichment. This was affirmed in Peter, supra, at
     p. 1018. Most recently, in Mack v. Canada (Attorney
     General) (2002), 60 O.R. (3d) 737, the Ontario
     Court of Appeal held that the legislation which created
      the Chinese head tax provided a juristic reason
     which prevented recovery of the head tax in unjust
653
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


enrichment. In the leading Canadian text, The Law
of Restitution, supra, McCamus and Maddaugh discuss
 the phrase “disposition of law” from Rathwell,
supra, stating, at p. 46:




. . . it is perhaps self-evident that an unjust enrichment
will not be established in any case where enrichment of
the defendant at the plaintiff’s expense is required by
law.
It seems clear, then, that valid legislation can provide
 a juristic reason which bars recovery in restitution
.
50
    Consumers’ Gas submits that the LPPs were
authorized by the Board’s rate orders which qualify
as a disposition of law. It seems to me that this sub-
mission is predicated on the validity and operability
of this scheme. The scheme has been challenged by
the appellant on the basis that it conflicts with s. 347
of the Criminal Code and, as a result of the doctrine
of paramountcy, is consequently inoperative. In the
GST Reference, supra, Lamer C.J. held that legislation
 provides a juristic reason “unless the statute
itself is ultra vires” (p. 477). Given that legislation
that would have been ultra vires the province cannot
provide a juristic reason, the same principle should
apply if the provincial legislation is inoperative by
virtue of the paramountcy doctrine. This position is
contemplated by Borins J.A. in his dissent when he
wrote, at para. 149:
In my view, it would be wrong to say that the rate orders
do not provide [Consumers’ Gas] with a defence under s.
18 of the OEBA because they have been rendered inoperative
 by the doctrine of federal paramountcy, and then
to breathe life into them for the purpose of finding that
they constitute a juristic reason for [Consumers’ Gas’s]
enrichment.
51
   As a result, the question of whether the statutory
framework can serve as a juristic reason depends on
whether the provision is held to be inoperative. If the
     654


     OEB orders are constitutionally valid and operative,
     they provide a juristic reason which bars recovery.
     Conversely, if the scheme is inoperative by virtue of
     a conflict with s. 347 of the Criminal Code, then a
     juristic reason is not present. In my view, the OEB
     rate orders are constitutionally inoperative to the
     extent of their conflict with s. 347 of the Criminal




     Code.
52
        The OEB rate orders require the receipt of LPPs
     at what is often a criminal rate of interest. Such
     receipt is prohibited by s. 347 of the Criminal Code.
     Both the OEB rate orders and s. 347 of the Criminal
     Code are intra vires the level of government that
     enacted them. The rate orders are intra vires the
     province by virtue of s. 92(13) (property and civil
     rights) of the Constitution Act, 1867. Section 347 of
     the Criminal Code is intra vires the federal government
      by virtue of s. 91(19) (interest) and s. 91(27)
     (criminal law power).
53
         It should be noted that the Board orders at issue
     did not require Consumers’ Gas to collect the LPPs
     within a period of 38 days. One could then make
     the argument that this was not an express operational
      conflict. But to my mind this is somewhat
     artificial. I say this because at bottom it is a necessary
      implication of the OEB orders to require payment
      within this period. In that respect it should
     be treated as an express order for purposes of the
     paramountcy analysis. Consequently, there is an
     express operational conflict between the rate orders
     and s. 347 of the Criminal Code in that it is impossible
      for Consumers’ Gas to comply with both
     provisions. Where there is an actual operational
     conflict, it is well settled that the provincial law is
     inoperative to the extent of the conflict (Multiple
     Access Ltd. v. McCutcheon, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 161, at
     p. 191; M & D Farm Ltd. v. Manitoba Agricultural
     Credit Corp., [1999] 2 S.C.R. 961). As a result,
     the Board orders are constitutionally inoperative.
     Because the Board orders are constitutionally
     inoperative, they do not provide a juristic reason.
     It therefore falls to Consumers’ Gas to show that
     there was a juristic reason for the enrichment
655
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


outside the established categories in order to rebut
the prima facie case made out by the appellant.
54
   The second stage of juristic reason analysis
requires a consideration of reasonable expectations
of the parties and public policy considerations.




55
   When the reasonable expectations of the parties
are considered, Consumers’ Gas’s submissions are
at first blush compelling. Consumers’ Gas submits,
on the one hand, that late payers cannot have reasonably
 expected that there would be no penalty for
failing to pay their bills on time and, on the other
hand, that Consumers’ Gas could reasonably have
expected that the OEB would not authorize an LPP
scheme that violated the Criminal Code. Because
Consumers’ Gas is operating in a regulated environment
, its reliance on OEB orders should be given
some weight. An inability to rely on such orders
would make it very difficult, if not impossible, to
operate in this environment. At this point, it should
be pointed out that the reasonable expectation of
the parties regarding LPPs is achieved by restrict-
ing the LPPs to the limit prescribed by s. 347 of the
Criminal Code and also would be consistent with
this Court’s decision in Transport North American
Express Inc. v. New Solutions Financial Corp.,
[2004] 1 S.C.R. 249, 2004 SCC 7.
56
   Consumers’ Gas’s reliance on the orders would
not provide a defence if it was charged under s. 347
of the Criminal Code because the orders are inoperative
 to the extent of their conflict with s. 347.
However, its reliance on the orders is relevant in
the context of determining the reasonable expectations
 of the parties in this second stage of the juristic
reason analysis.
57
   Finally, the overriding public policy consideration
 in this case is the fact that the LPPs were collected
 in contravention of the Criminal Code. As a
matter of public policy, a criminal should not be permitted
 to keep the proceeds of his crime (Oldfield
v. Transamerica Life Insurance Co. of Canada,
[2002] 1 S.C.R. 742, 2002 SCC 22, at para. 11;
     656


     New Solutions, supra). Borins J.A. focussed on this
     public policy consideration in his dissent. He held
     that, in light of this Court’s decision in Garland No.
     1, allowing Consumers’ Gas to retain the LPPs collected
      in violation of s. 347 would let Consumers’
     Gas profit from a crime and benefit from its own
     wrongdoing.




58
        In weighing these considerations, from 1981-
     1994, Consumers’ Gas’s reliance on the inoperative
     OEB orders provides a juristic reason for the enrichment
     . As the parties have argued, there are three
     possible dates from which to measure the unjust
     enrichment: 1981, when s. 347 of the Criminal
     Code was enacted, 1994, when this action was commenced
     , and 1998, when this Court held in Garland
     No. 1 that the LPPs were limited by s. 347 of the
     Criminal Code. For the period between 1981 and
     1994, when the current action was commenced,
     there is no suggestion that Consumers’ Gas was
     aware that the LPPs violated s. 347 of the Criminal
     Code. This mitigates in favour of Consumers’ Gas
     during this period. The reliance of Consumers’ Gas
     on the OEB orders, in the absence of actual or con-
     structive notice that the orders were inoperative, is
     sufficient to provide a juristic reason for Consumers’
     Gas’s enrichment during this first period.
59
        However, in 1994, when this action was commenced
     , Consumers’ Gas was put on notice of
     the serious possibility that it was violating the
     Criminal Code in charging the LPPs. This possibility
      became a reality when this Court held
     that the LPPs were in excess of the s. 347 limit.
     Consumers’ Gas could have requested that the
     OEB alter its rate structure until the matter was
     adjudicated in order to ensure that it was not in
     violation of the Criminal Code or asked for contin-
     gency arrangements to be made. Its decision not to
     do this, as counsel for the appellant pointed out in
     oral submissions, was a “gamble”. After the action
     was commenced and Consumers’ Gas was put
     on notice that there was a serious possibility the
     LPPs violated the Criminal Code, it was no longer
657
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


reasonable for Consumers’ Gas to rely on the OEB
rate orders to authorize the LPPs.
60
   Moreover, once this Court held that LPPs were
offside, for purposes of unjust enrichment, it is
logical and fair to choose the date on which the
action for redress commenced. Awarding restitution




 from 1981 would be unfair to the respondent
since it was entitled to reasonably rely on the OEB
orders until the commencement of this action in
1994. Awarding restitution from 1998 would be
unfair to the appellant. This is because it would
permit the respondent to retain LPPs collected
in violation of s. 347 after 1994 when it was no
longer reasonable for the respondent to have relied
on the OEB orders and the respondent should be
presumed to have known the LPPs violated the
Criminal Code. Further, awarding restitution from
1998 would deviate from the general rule that
monetary remedies like damages and interest are
awarded as of the date of occurrence of the breach
or as of the date of action rather than the date of
judgment.

61
   Awarding restitution from 1994 appropriately
balances the respondent’s reliance on the OEB
orders from 1981-1994 with the appellant’s expectation
 of recovery of monies that were charged
in violation of the Criminal Code once the serious
 possibility that the OEB orders were inoperative
 had been raised. As a result, as of the date
this action was commenced in 1994, it was no
longer reasonable for Consumers’ Gas to rely on
the OEB orders to insulate them from liability in
a civil action of this type for collecting LPPs in
contravention of the Criminal Code. Thus, after
the action was commenced in 1994, there was no
longer a juristic reason for the enrichment of the
respondent, so the appellant is entitled to restitution
 of the portion of monies paid to satisfy LPPs
that exceeded an interest rate of 60 percent, as
defined in s. 347 of the Criminal Code.
     658


     B. Defences
62
         Having held that the appellant’s claim for unjust
     enrichment is made out for LPPs paid after 1994,
     it remains to be determined whether the respondent
      can avail itself of any defences raised. It is only
     necessary to consider the defences for the period
     after 1994, when the elements of unjust enrichment




     are made out, and thus I will not consider whether
     the defences would have applied if there had been
     unjust enrichment before 1994. I will address each
     defence in turn.
        (a) Change of Position Defence
63
     are made out, the remedy of restitution will be
     denied where an innocent defendant demonstrates
     that it has materially changed its position as a result
     of an enrichment such that it would be inequitable
     to require the benefit to be returned (Storthoaks,
     supra). In this case, the respondent says that any
     “benefit” it received from the unlawful charges was
     passed on to other customers in the form of lower
     gas delivery rates. Having “passed on” the benefit
     , it says, it should not be required to disgorge
     the amount of the benefit (a second time) to overcharged
      customers such as the appellant. The issue
     here, however, is not the ultimate destination within
     the regulatory system of an amount of money equivalent
      to the unlawful overcharges, nor is this case
     concerned with the net impact of these overcharges
     on the respondent’s financial position. The issue is
     whether, as between the overcharging respondent
     and the overcharged appellant, the passing of the
     benefit on to other customers excuses the respondent
      of having overcharged the appellant.
64
        The appellant submits that the defence of change
     of position is not available to a defendant who is
     a wrongdoer and that, since the respondent in this
     case was enriched by its own criminal misconduct, it
     should not be permitted to avail itself of the defence.
     I agree. The rationale for the change of position
659
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


defence appears to flow from considerations of
equity. G. H. L. Fridman writes that “[o]ne situation
 which would appear to render it inequitable
for the defendant to be required to disgorge a benefit
 received from the plaintiff in the absence of any
wrongdoing on the part of the defendant would be if
he has changed his position for the worse as a result




of the receipt of the money in question” (Restitution
(2nd ed. 1992), at p. 458). In the leading British case
on the defence, Lipkin Gorman v. Karpnale Ltd.,
[1992] 4 All E.R. 512 (H.L.), Lord Goff stated (at
p. 533):
[I]t is right that we should ask ourselves: why do we feel
that it would be unjust to allow restitution in cases such
as these [where the defendant has changed his or her
position]? The answer must be that, where an innocent
defendant’s position is so changed that he will suffer
an injustice if called upon to repay or to repay in full,
the injustice of requiring him so to repay outweighs the
injustice of denying the plaintiff restitution.
65
   If the change of position defence is intended to
prevent injustice from occurring, the whole of the
plaintiff’s and defendant’s conduct during the course
of the transaction should be open to scrutiny in order
to determine which party has a better claim. Where
a defendant has obtained the enrichment through
some wrongdoing of his own, he cannot then assert
that it would be unjust to return the enrichment to
the plaintiff. In this case, the respondent cannot
avail itself of this defence because the LPPs were
obtained in contravention of the Criminal Code and,
as a result, it cannot be unjust for the respondent to
have to return them.
66
    Thus, the change of position defence does not
help the respondent in this case. Even assuming that
the respondent would have met the other requirements
 set out in Storthoaks, supra, the respondent
cannot avail itself of the defence because it is not
an “innocent” defendant given that the benefit was
received as a result of a Criminal Code violation.
It is not necessary, as a result, to discuss change of
position in a comprehensive manner and I leave a
     660


     fuller development of the other elements of this
     defence to future cases.
        (b) Section 18/25 of the Ontario Energy Board
            Act




67
        The respondent raises a statutory defence found
     formerly in s. 18 and presently in s. 25 of the 1998
     OEBA. The former and the present sections are iden-
     tical, and read:
     An order of the Board is a good and sufficient defence
     to any proceeding brought or taken against any person
     in so far as the act or omission that is the subject of the
     proceeding is in accordance with the order.
     I agree with McMurtry C.J.O. that this defence
     should be read down so as to exclude protection
     from civil liability damage arising out of Criminal
     Code violations. As a result, the defence does not
     apply in this case and we do not have to consider the
     constitutionality of the section.
68
     legislative provisions purporting to restrict a citizen
     ’s rights of action should attract strict construction
      (Berardinelli, supra). In this case, I again agree
     with McMurtry C.J.O. that the legislature could not
     reasonably be believed to have contemplated that an
     OEB order could mandate criminal conduct, despite
     the broad wording of the section. Section 18/25,
     thus, cannot provide a defence to an action for
     restitution arising from an OEB order authorizing
     criminal conduct. As a consequence, like McMurtry
     C.J.O., I find the argument on s. 18/25 to be unper-
     suasive.
69
        Because I find that it could not have been the
     intention of the legislature to bar civil claims stem-
     ming from acts that offend the Criminal Code,
     on a strict construction, s. 18/25 cannot protect
     Consumers’ Gas from these types of claims. If the
661
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


provincial legislature had wanted to eliminate the
possibility of such actions, it should have done
so explicitly in the provision. In the absence of
such explicit provision, s. 18/25 must be read so
as to exclude from its protection civil actions arising
 from violations of the Criminal Code and thus
does not provide a defence for the respondent in this




case.
   (c) Exclusive Jurisdiction and Collateral Attack
70
   McMurtry C.J.O. was also correct in his holding
that the OEB does not have exclusive jurisdiction
over this dispute. While the dispute does involve rate
orders, at its heart it is a private law matter under
the competence of civil courts and consequently the
Board does not have jurisdiction to order the remedy
sought by the appellant.
71
   In addition, McMurtry C.J.O. is correct in holding
 that this action does not constitute an impermissible
 collateral attack on the OEB’s order. The
doctrine of collateral attack prevents a party from
undermining previous orders issued by a court
or administrative tribunal (see Toronto (City) v.
C.U.P.E., Local 79, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 77, 2003 SCC
63; D. J. Lange, The Doctrine of Res Judicata in
Canada (2000), at pp. 369-70). Generally, it is
invoked where the party is attempting to challenge
 the validity of a binding order in the wrong
forum, in the sense that the validity of the order
comes into question in separate proceedings when
that party has not used the direct attack procedures
that were open to it (i.e., appeal or judicial review).
In Wilson v. The Queen, [1983] 2 S.C.R. 594, at
p. 599, this Court described the rule against collateral
 attack as follows:

It has long been a fundamental rule that a court order,
made by a court having jurisdiction to make it, stands
and is binding and conclusive unless it is set aside on
appeal or lawfully quashed. It is also well settled in
the authorities that such an order may not be attacked
     662


     collaterally — and a collateral attack may be described
     as an attack made in proceedings other than those whose
     specific object is the reversal, variation, or nullification of
     the order or judgment.
     Based on a plain reading of this rule, the doctrine of
     collateral attack does not apply in this case because




     here the specific object of the appellant’s action is
     not to invalidate or render inoperative the Board’s
     orders, but rather to recover money that was illegally
     collected by the respondent as a result of Board
     orders. Consequently, the collateral attack doctrine
     does not apply.
72
        Moreover, the appellant’s case lacks other hall-
     marks of collateral attack. As McMurtry C.J.O.
     points out at para. 30 of his reasons, the collateral
     attack cases all involve a party, bound by an order,
     seeking to avoid the effect of that order by challenging
      its validity in the wrong forum. In this case, the
     appellant is not bound by the Board’s orders, therefore
      the rationale behind the rule is not invoked.
     The fundamental policy behind the rule against collateral
      attack is to “maintain the rule of law and to
     preserve the repute of the administration of justice”
     (R. v. Litchfield, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 333, at p. 349). The
     idea is that if a party could avoid the consequences
     of an order issued against it by going to another
     forum, this would undermine the integrity of the justice
      system. Consequently, the doctrine is intended
     to prevent a party from circumventing the effect of a
     decision rendered against it.
73
        In this case, the appellant is not the object of the
     orders and thus there can be no concern that he is
     seeking to avoid the orders by bringing this action.
     As a result, a threat to the integrity of the system
     does not exist because the appellant is not legally
     bound to follow the orders. Thus, this action does
     not appear, in fact, to be a collateral attack on the
     Board’s orders.
663
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


   (d) The Regulated Industries Defence
74
   The respondent submits that it can avail itself of
the “regulated industries defence” to bar recovery in
restitution because an act authorized by a valid provincial
 regulatory scheme cannot be contrary to the
public interest or an offence against the state and, as




a result, the collection of LPPs pursuant to orders
issued by the OEB cannot be considered to be contrary
 to the public interest and thus cannot be contrary
 to s. 347 of the Criminal Code.
75
   Winkler J. held that the underlying purpose of
the defence, regulation of monopolistic industries in
order to ensure “just and reasonable” rates for consumers
, would be served in the circumstances and as
a result the defence would normally apply. However,
because of the statutory language of s. 347, Winkler
J. determined that the defence was not permitted in
this case. He wrote, at para. 34, “[t]he defendant can
point to no case which allows the defence unless the
federal statute in question uses the word ‘unduly’ or
the phrase ‘in the public interest’”. Absent such rec-
ognition in the statute of “public interest”, he held,
no leeway for provincial exceptions exist.
76
   I agree with the approach of Winkler J. The principle
 underlying the application of the defence is
delineated in Attorney General of Canada v. Law
Society of British Columbia, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 307, at
p. 356:
When a federal statute can be properly interpreted so as
not to interfere with a provincial statute, such an interpretation
 is to be applied in preference to another applicable
construction which would bring about a conflict between
the two statutes.
Estey J. reached this conclusion after canvassing
the cases in which the regulated industries defence
had been applied. Those cases all involved conflict
between federal competition law and a provincial
 regulatory scheme, but the application of the
     664


     defence in those cases had to do with the particular
     wording of the statutes in question. While I cannot
     see a principled reason why the defence should not
     be broadened to apply to cases outside the area of
     competition law, its application should flow from
     the above enunciated principle.




77
        Winkler J. was correct in concluding that, in order
     for the regulated industries defence to be available
     to the respondent, Parliament needed to have indicated
     , either expressly or by necessary implication,
     that s. 347 of the Criminal Code granted leeway to
     those acting pursuant to a valid provincial regulatory
      scheme. If there were any such indication, I
     would say that it should be interpreted, in keeping
     with the above principle, not to interfere with the
     provincial regulatory scheme. But s. 347 does not
     contain the required indication for exempting a provincial
      scheme.
78
         This view is further supported by this Court’s
     decision in R. v. Jorgensen, [1995] 4 S.C.R. 55. In
     that case, the accused was charged with “‘know-
     ingly’ selling obscene material ‘without lawful justification
      or excuse’” (para. 44). The accused argued
     that the Ontario Film Review Board had approved
     the videotapes, therefore it had a lawful justification
     or excuse. This Court considered whether approval
     by a provincial body could displace a criminal
     charge. Sopinka J., for the majority, held that in
     order to exempt acts taken pursuant to a provincial
     regulatory body from the reach of the criminal law,
     Parliament must unequivocally express this intention
      in the legislative provision in issue (at para.
     118):
        While Parliament has the authority to introduce dis-
     pensation or exemption from criminal law in determining
      what is and what is not criminal, and may do so by
     authorizing a provincial body or official acting under provincial
      legislation to issue licences and the like, an intent
     to do so must be made plain.
665
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


79
   The question of whether the regulated industries
defence can apply to the respondent is actually a
question of whether s. 347 of the Criminal Code can
support the notion that a valid provincial regulatory
scheme cannot be contrary to the public interest or
an offence against the state. In the previous cases
involving the regulated industries defence, the language




 of “the public interest” and “unduly” limiting
competition has always been present. The absence
of such language from s. 347 of the Criminal Code
precludes the application of this defence in this
case.

   (e) De Facto Doctrine
80
    Consumers’ Gas submits that because it was
acting pursuant to a disposition of law that was valid
at the time — the Board orders — they should be
exempt from liability by virtue of the de facto doctrine
. This argument cannot succeed. Consumers’
Gas is not a government official acting under colour
of authority. While the respondent points to the
Board orders as justification for its actions, this does
not bring the respondent into the purview of the de
facto doctrine because the case law does not support
 extending the doctrine’s application beyond
the acts of government officials. The underlying
purpose of the doctrine is to preserve law and order
and the authority of the government. These interests
are not at stake in the instant litigation. As a result,
Consumers’ Gas cannot rely on the de facto doctrine
to resist the plaintiff’s claim.

81
   Furthermore, the de facto doctrine attaches to
government and its officials in order to protect and
maintain the rule of law and the authority of government
. An extension of the doctrine to a private
corporation that is simply regulated by a government
 authority is not supported by the case law and
in my view does not further the underlying purpose
of the doctrine. In Reference re Manitoba Language
Rights, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 721, this Court held, at
p. 756, that:
     666


        There is only one true condition precedent to the
     application of the doctrine: the de facto officer must
     occupy his or her office under colour of authority.

     It cannot be said that Consumers’ Gas was a de
     facto officer acting under colour of authority when
     it charged LPPs to customers. Consumers’ Gas is a
     private corporation acting in a regulatory context,




     not an officer vested with some sort of authority.
     When charging LPPs, Consumers’ Gas is engaging
      in commerce, not issuing a permit or passing
     a by-law.
82
         In rejecting the application of the de facto
     doctrine here, I am cognizant of the passage in
     Reference re Manitoba Language Rights, at p. 757,
     cited by the intervener Toronto Hydro and which, at
     first glance, appears to imply that the de facto doctrine
      might apply to private corporations:

     . . . the de facto doctrine will save those rights, obligations
      and other effects which have arisen out of actions
     performed pursuant to invalid Acts of the Manitoba
     Legislature by public and private bodies corporate,
     courts, judges, persons exercising statutory powers and
     public officials. [Emphasis added.]
83
        While this passage appears to indicate that “private
      bodies corporate” are protected by the doctrine,
     it must be read in the context of the entire judgment.
     Earlier, at p. 755, the Court referred to the writings
     of Judge A. Constantineau in The De Facto Doctrine
     (1910), at pp. 3-4. The following excerpt from that
     passage is relevant:

        The de facto doctrine is a rule or principle of law
     which . . . recognizes the existence of, and protects from
     collateral attack, public or private bodies corporate,
     which, though irregularly or illegally organized, yet,
     under color of law, openly exercise the powers and func-
     tions of regularly created bodies . . . . [Emphasis added.]

     In this passage, I think it is clear that the Court’s
     reference to “private bodies corporate” is limited
     to issues affecting the creation of the corporation,
     for example where a corporation was incorporated
     under an invalid statute. It does not suggest that the
667
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


acts of the corporation are shielded from liability by
virtue of the de facto doctrine.
84
  This view finds further support in the following
passage from the judgment (at p. 755):
That the foundation of the principle is the more fundamental




 principle of the rule of law is clearly stated by
Constantineau in the following passage (at pp. 5-6):
   Again, the doctrine is necessary to maintain the
   supremacy of the law and to preserve peace and order
   in the community at large, since any other rule would
   lead to such uncertainty and confusion, as to break up
   the order and quiet of all civil administration. Indeed,
   if any individual or body of individuals were permitted
   , at his or their pleasure, to challenge the authority
   of and refuse obedience to the government of the
   state and the numerous functionaries through whom
   it exercises its various powers, or refuse to recognize
   municipal bodies and their officers, on the ground of
   irregular existence or defective titles, insubordination
   and disorder of the worst kind would be encouraged,
   which might at any time culminate in anarchy.
The underlying purpose of the doctrine is to preserve
 law and order and the authority of the government
. These interests are not at stake in the instant
litigation. In sum, I find no merit in Consumers’
Gas’s argument that the de facto doctrine shields it
from liability and as a result this doctrine should not
be a bar to the appellant’s recovery.

C. Other Orders Requested
   (a) Preservation Order
85
   The appellant, Garland, requests an “Amax-type”
preservation order on the basis that the LPPs con-
tinue to be collected at a criminal rate during the
pendency of this action, and these payments would
never have been made but for the delays inherent
in litigation (Amax Potash Ltd. v. Government of
Saskatchewan, [1977] 2 S.C.R. 576). In my view,
however, a preservation order is not appropriate in
this case. Consumers’ Gas has now ceased to collect
the LPPs at a criminal rate. As a result, if a preservation
 order were made, there would be no future
     668


     LPPs to which it could attach. Even with respect
     to the LPPs paid between 1994 and the present, to
     which such an order could attach, a preservation
     order should not be granted for three further reasons
     : (1) such an order would serve no practical purpose
     , (2) the appellant has not satisfied the criteria in
     the Ontario Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990,




     Reg. 194, and (3) Amax can be distinguished from
     this case.
86
        First, the appellant has not alleged that
     Consumers’ Gas is an impecunious defendant or that
     there is any other reason to believe that Consumers’
     Gas would not satisfy a judgment against it. Even if
     there were some reason to believe that Consumers’
     Gas would not satisfy such a judgment, an Amax-
     type order allows the defendant to spend the monies
     being held in the ordinary course of business — no
     actual fund would be created. So the only thing that
     a preservation order would achieve would be to prevent
      Consumers’ Gas from spending the money
     earned from the LPPs in a non-ordinary manner (for
     example, such as moving it off-shore) which the
     appellant has not alleged is likely to occur absent
     the order.
87
        Second, the respondent submits that by seeking
      a preservation order the appellant is attempting
     to avoid Rule 45.02 of the Ontario Rules of Civil
     Procedure, the only source of jurisdiction in Ontario
     to make a preservation order. The Rules of Civil
     Procedure apply to class proceedings and do not
     permit such an order in these circumstances. Rule
     45.02 provides that, “[w]here the right of a party to
     a specific fund is in question, the court may order
     the fund to be paid into court or otherwise secured
     on such terms as are just” (emphasis added). The
     respondent submits that the appellant is not in fact
     claiming a specific fund here. In the absence of submissions
      by the appellant on this issue, I am of the
     view that the appellant has not satisfied the criteria
      set out in the Ontario Rules of Civil Procedure
     and that this Court could refuse to grant the order
     requested on this basis.
669
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


88
   Finally, the appellant’s use of Amax, supra, as
authority for the type of order sought is without
merit. The appellant has cited the judgment very
selectively. The portion of the judgment the appellant
 cites in his written submissions reads in full (at
p. 598):
Apart from the Rules this Court has the discretion to




make an order as requested by appellants directing
the Province of Saskatchewan to hold, as stakeholder,
such sums as are paid by the appellants pursuant to the
impugned legislation but with the right to use such sums
in the interim for Provincial purposes, and with the obli-
gation to repay them with interest in the event the legislation
 is ultimately held to be ultra vires. Such an order,
however, would be novel, in giving the stakeholder the
right to spend the moneys at stake, and I cannot see that it
would serve any practical purpose. [Emphasis added.]
The Court in Amax went on to refuse to make the
order. So while the appellant is right that the Court
in Amax failed to reject the hypothetical possibility
of making such an order in the future, it seems to me
that in this case, as in Amax, such an order would
serve no practical purpose. For these reasons, I find
there is no basis for making a preservation order in
this case.

   (b) Declaration That the LPPs Need Not Be
       Paid
89
   The appellant also seeks a declaration that the
LPPs need not be paid. Given that the respondent
asserts that the LPP is no longer charged at a criminal
 rate, issuing such a declaration would serve no
practical purpose and as a result such a declaration
should not be made.

   (c) Costs
90
   The appellant is entitled to his costs throughout.
This should be understood to mean that, regardless
of the outcome of any future litigation, the appellant
is entitled to his costs in the proceedings leading up
to and including Garland No. 1 and this appeal. In
addition, in oral submissions counsel for the Law
Foundation of Ontario made the point that in order
to reduce costs in future class actions, “litigation by
installments”, as occurred in this case, should be
     670


     avoided. I agree. On this issue, I endorse the com-
     ments of McMurtry C.J.O., at para. 76 of his reasons
     :
     In this context, I note that the protracted history of these
     proceedings cast some doubt on the wisdom of hearing a




     case in instalments, as was done here. Before employing
     an instalment approach, it should be considered whether
     there is potential for such a procedure to result in multiple
      rounds of proceedings through various levels of court.
     Such an eventuality is to be avoided where possible, as it
     does little service to the parties or to the efficient administration
      of justice.
     VI. Disposition
91
        For the foregoing reasons, I would allow the
     appeal with costs throughout, set aside the judgment
      of the Ontario Court of Appeal, and substitute
     therefor an order that Consumers’ Gas repay LPPs
     collected from the appellant in excess of the interest
     limit stipulated in s. 347 after the action was commenced
      in 1994 in an amount to be determined by
     the trial judge.

        Appeal allowed with costs.

       Solicitors for the appellant: McGowan Elliott &
     Kim, Toronto.

        Solicitors for the respondent: Aird & Berlis,
     Toronto.

        Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General
     of Canada: Deputy Attorney General of Canada,
     Ottawa.

        Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General
     for Saskatchewan: Deputy Attorney General for
     Saskatchewan, Regina.

        Solicitors for the intervener Toronto Hydro-
     Electric System Limited: Ogilvy Renault, Toronto.

        Solicitor for the intervener the Law Foundation
     of Ontario: Mark M. Orkin, Toronto.
671
[2004] 1 R.C.S.


  Solicitors for the intervener Union Gas Limited:
Torys, Toronto.




