704


Grant Thornton LLP and
Kent M. Ostridge Appellants

v.

Province of New Brunswick Respondent

- and -

Grant Thornton International Ltd. Appellant

v.

Province of New Brunswick Respondent

and

Chartered Professional Accountants of
Canada Intervener

Indexed as: Grant Thornton LLP v.
New Brunswick
2021 SCC 31
File No.: 39182.
2021: March 24; 2021: July 29.
Present: Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Côté, Brown, Rowe,
Martin and Kasirer JJ.

ON APPEAL FROM THE COURT OF APPEAL FOR
NEW BRUNSWICK
    Limitation of actions — Discoverability — Requisite
degree of knowledge to discover claim — Negligence —
Province delivering loan guarantees to company based
on auditor’s report — Company running out of working
capital months after receiving loan from bank — Province
paying out guarantees — Province commencing negligence
 claim against auditor — Auditor seeking summary
judgment on basis that claim commenced after two-year
statutory limitation period — Standard to be applied
in determining whether plaintiff has requisite degree of
knowledge to discover claim — Whether province discovered
 negligence claim against auditor — Whether claim
statute-barred — Limitation of Actions Act, S.N.B. 2009,
c. L-8.5, s. 5(1)(a), (2).
705
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


    In 2008, a New Brunswick-based company sought
loans from a bank, but it needed loan guarantees from
the province. The province agreed to $50 million in loan
guarantees, conditional upon the company subjecting itself
 to an external review of its assets by its auditor. The
auditor opined in a report that the company’s financial
statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
company’s financial position in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. Relying upon that report,
the province executed and delivered the loan guarantees,
which, in turn, enabled the company to borrow funds from
the bank. When the company ran out of working capital
four months after receiving the loan guarantees from the
province, the bank called on the province to pay out the
loan guarantees, which it did on March 18, 2010. The
province then retained another accounting and auditing
firm to review the company’s financial position. The other
firm’s report was issued in draft on February 4, 2011,
and opined that the company’s financial statements had
not, in fact, been prepared in conformity with generally
accepted accounting principles. Specifically, the other firm
estimated that the company’s assets and net earnings were
overstated by a material amount. Those misstatements had
not been identified by the auditor in its report.
    On June 23, 2014, the province commenced a claim
against the auditor, alleging negligence. The auditor
moved for summary judgment to have the claim dismissed
as statute-barred by virtue of the limitation period under
 s. 5(1)(a) of the provincial Limitation of Actions Act
(“LAA”), which provides that no claim shall be brought
after two years from the day on which the claim was
discovered. The motions judge held that, properly inter-
preted, s. 5(2) of the LAA, which sets out when a claim is
discovered, required that the province knew or ought to
have known that it had prima facie grounds to infer that
it had a potential cause of action against the auditor. He
granted summary judgment and struck the province’s action
, finding that the province had the requisite knowledge
by March 18, 2010, more than two years before it commenced
 its claim. The Court of Appeal allowed the province
’s appeal and set aside the motion judge’s judgment.
It rejected the standard used by the motions judge and
held that the governing standard was whether a plaintiff
knows or ought reasonably to have known facts that confer
a legally enforceable right to a remedy, which the court
found can only exist if the plaintiff has knowledge of each
constituent element of the claim. Applying that standard,
706


it found that the limitation period had not been triggered
because the province had not yet discovered its claim.
   Held: The appeals should be allowed and the motions
judge’s judgment restored.
    The standard to be applied in determining whether a
plaintiff has the requisite degree of knowledge to discover
a claim under s. 5(2) of the LAA, thereby triggering the
two-year limitation period in s. 5(1)(a), is whether the
plaintiff has knowledge, actual or constructive, of the
material facts upon which a plausible inference of liability
 on the defendant’s part can be drawn. Applying this
standard in the present case, the province discovered its
claim against the auditor on February 4, 2011. By then,
it knew or ought to have known that a loss occurred and
that the loss was caused in whole or in part by conduct
which the auditor had been retained to detect. This was
sufficient to draw a plausible inference that the auditor had
been negligent. Since the province did not bring its claim
until June 23, 2014, more than two years later, its claim is
therefore statute-barred.
    In order to properly set the standard, two distinct inquiries
 are required. The first inquiry asks whether, in
determining if a statutory limitation period has been triggered
, the plaintiff’s state of knowledge is to be assessed
in the same manner as the common law rule of discoverability
. Under that rule, a cause of action arises for purposes
of a limitation period when the material facts on which
it is based have been discovered or ought to have been
discovered by the plaintiff by the exercise of reasonable
diligence. The common law rule of discoverability does
not apply to every statutory limitation period. Rather, it
is an interpretive tool for construing limitations statutes
and, as such, it can be ousted by clear legislative language.
Assessing whether a legislature has codified, limited or
ousted the common law rule is a matter of statutory interpretation
. Section 5(1)(a) and (2) of the LAA does not
contain any language ousting or limiting the common law
rule; rather, it codifies it. This interpretation is supported
by the words of s. 5, read in their entire context and in
their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with
the LAA’s scheme and object, and the intention of the
legislature. Accordingly, as established by the rule of discoverability
 and the LAA, the limitation period is triggered
707
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


when the plaintiff discovers or ought to have discovered,
through the exercise of reasonable diligence, the material
facts on which the claim is based.
    The second inquiry relates to the particular degree
of knowledge required to discover a claim. A claim is
discovered when a plaintiff has knowledge, actual or constructive
, of the material facts upon which a plausible
inference of liability on the defendant’s part can be drawn.
This approach remains faithful to the common law rule
of discoverability, which recognizes that it is unfair to
deprive a plaintiff from bringing a claim before it can
reasonably be expected to know the claim exists. It also
accords with s. 5 of the LAA, promotes consistency and
ensures that the degree of knowledge needed to discover
a claim is more than mere suspicion or speculation. At the
same time, it ensures the standard does not rise so high
as to require certainty of liability or perfect knowledge.
A plausible inference of liability is enough; it strikes the
equitable balance of interests that the common law rule of
discoverability seeks to achieve.
    The material facts that must be actually or constructively
 known are generally set out in the limitation statute.
In the LAA, they are listed in s. 5(2)(a) to (c). A claim is
discovered when the plaintiff has actual or constructive
knowledge that: (a) the injury, loss or damage occurred;
(b) the injury loss or damage was caused by or contributed
to by an act or omission; and (c) the act or omission was
that of the defendant. This list is cumulative. In assessing
the plaintiff’s state of knowledge, both direct and circumstantial
 evidence can be used. A plaintiff will have
constructive knowledge when the evidence shows that
the plaintiff ought to have discovered the material facts
by exercising reasonable diligence. Finally, the governing
standard requires the plaintiff to be able to draw a plausible
inference of liability on the part of the defendant from the
material facts that are actually or constructively known.
This means that in a negligence claim, a plaintiff does
not need knowledge that the defendant owed it a duty of
care or that the defendant’s act or omission breached the
applicable standard of care. All that is required is actual or
constructive knowledge of the material facts from which a
708


plausible inference can be made that the defendant acted
negligently.
    In the instant case, the province had actual or constructive
 knowledge of the material facts — namely, that a loss
occurred and that the loss was caused or contributed to
by an act or omission of the auditor — when it received
the draft report from the other firm on February 4, 2011.
The auditor’s act or omission was issuing its report with
respect to the company’s financial statements, despite
those statements not being prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles and not fairly
representing, in all material respects, the company’s financial
 position. This act or omission caused or contributed
to the province’s loss because the province executed the
$50 million in loan guarantees in reliance on the auditor
’s representations. Nothing more was needed to draw a
plausible inference of negligence. The province’s claim is
therefore statute-barred by s. 5(1)(a) of the LAA.

Cases Cited
   Referred to: Central Trust Co. v. Rafuse, [1986] 2
S.C.R. 147; Kamloops (City of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R.
2; Ryan v. Moore, 2005 SCC 38, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 53; M.
(K.) v. M. (H.), [1992] 3 S.C.R. 6; Peixeiro v. Haberman,
[1997] 3 S.C.R. 549; Pioneer Corp. v. Godfrey, 2019 SCC
42, [2019] 3 S.C.R. 295; Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re),
[1998] 1 S.C.R. 27; Galota v. Festival Hall Developments
Ltd., 2016 ONCA 585, 133 O.R. (3d) 35; De Shazo v.
Nations Energy Co., 2005 ABCA 241, 48 Alta. L.R. (4th)
25; Jardine v. Saskatoon Police Service, 2017 SKQB 217;
Crombie Property Holdings Ltd. v. McColl-Frontenac Inc.,
2017 ONCA 16, 406 D.L.R. (4th) 252; Brown v. Wahl,
2015 ONCA 778, 128 O.R. (3d) 583; Lawless v. Anderson,
2011 ONCA 102, 276 O.A.C. 75; Insurance Corporation
of British Columbia v. Mehat, 2018 BCCA 242, 11
B.C.L.R. (6th) 217; Kowal v. Shyiak, 2012 ONCA 512,
296 O.A.C. 352; Hill v. South Alberta Land Registration
District (1993), 8 Alta. L.R. (3d) 379; HOOPP Realty
Inc. v. Emery Jamieson LLP, 2018 ABQB 276, 27 C.P.C.
(8th) 83; K.L.B. v. British Columbia, 2003 SCC 51, [2003]
2 S.C.R. 403.

Statutes and Regulations Cited
Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. B-3.
Companies’ Creditors Arrangement Act, R.S.C. 1985,
  c. C-36.
709
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


Limitation of Actions Act, S.N.B. 2009, c. L-8.5, ss. 1(1)
   “claim”, 5.

Authors Cited
New Brunswick. Legislative Assembly. Journal of
  Debates (Hansard), 3rd Sess., 56th Assem., June 17,
  2009, p. 50.
New Brunswick. Office of the Attorney General. Commentary
   on Bill 28: Limitation of Actions Act, January 2009
  (online: https://www.gnb.ca/legis/bill/pdf/56/3/Limita
  tions-e.pdf; archived version: https://www. scc-csc.ca/
  cso-dce/2021SCC-CSC31_1_eng.pdf).

   APPEALS from a judgment of the New Brunswick
Court of Appeal (Drapeau, Quigg and Green JJ.A.),
2020 NBCA 18, 54 C.P.C. (8th) 271, [2020] N.B.J.
No. 70 (QL), 2020 CarswellNB 140 (WL Can.),
setting aside a decision of Grant J., 2019 NBQB 36,
[2019] N.B.J. No. 76 (QL), 2019 CarswellNB 151
(WL Can.). Appeals allowed.

   Peter Griffin and Anthony S. Richardson, for
the appellants Grant Thornton LLP and Kent
M. Ostridge.

   Steven R. Barnett, Q.C., and J. Charles Foster,
Q.C., for the appellant Grant Thornton International
Ltd.

   Josie H. Marks and Frederick C. McElman, Q.C.,
for the respondent.

     Guy J. Pratte, for the intervener.

     The judgment of the Court was delivered by

     Moldaver J. —

I.

[1] On June 23, 2014, the Province of New
Brunswick (“Province”) filed a statement of claim
against Grant Thornton LLP, Kent M. Ostridge and
Grant Thornton International Ltd. (collectively,
“Grant Thornton”), seeking damages for negligence.
In response, Grant Thornton brought summary judgment
 motions to have the Province’s claim dismissed
710


as statute-barred by virtue of the two-year limitation
period under s. 5(1)(a) of the Limitation of Actions
Act, S.N.B. 2009, c. L-8.5 (“LAA”).

[2] The motions judge granted summary judgment
in favour of Grant Thornton. He found that s. 5(1)(a)
barred the claim because the Province knew or ought
to have known that it had prima facie grounds to infer
that it had a potential claim against Grant Thornton
more than two years before commencing its claim.
The Court of Appeal overturned that decision. It
rejected the “prima facie grounds” standard used by
the motions judge and held instead that the governing
 standard is whether a plaintiff knows or ought
reasonably to have known facts that confer a legally
enforceable right to a remedy. That right, the court
explained, only exists if the plaintiff has knowledge
of each constituent element of the claim. Applying
this standard, the court held that the two-year limitation
 period in s. 5(1)(a) had not been triggered
because the Province had not yet discovered its claim
(even though the Province had issued a 106-para-
graph statement of claim almost six years before
receiving the reasons of the Court of Appeal). Grant
Thornton now appeals to this Court.

[3] This case turns on the standard to be applied in
determining whether a plaintiff has the requisite degree
 of knowledge to discover a claim under s. 5(2),
thereby triggering the two-year limitation period in
s. 5(1)(a). Respectfully, the Court of Appeal adopted
too high a standard. In my view, a claim is discovered
when the plaintiff has knowledge, actual or constructive
, of the material facts upon which a plausible
inference of liability on the defendant’s part can be
drawn. It follows from this standard that a plaintiff
does not need knowledge of all the constituent elements
 of a claim to discover that claim.
711
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


[4] In the present case, I am satisfied that the
Province discovered its claim against Grant Thornton
on February 4, 2011. By then, the Province knew or
ought to have known that a loss occurred and that
the loss was caused in whole or in part by conduct
which Grant Thornton had been retained to detect.
This was sufficient to draw a plausible inference that
Grant Thornton had been negligent. Although the
Province had this knowledge by February 4, 2011,
it did not bring its claim until June 23, 2014, more
than two years later. The claim is therefore statute-
barred by s. 5(1)(a) of the LAA. I would accordingly
allow the appeal brought by Grant Thornton LLP and
Kent M. Ostridge and the appeal brought by Grant
Thornton International Ltd., set aside the Court of
Appeal’s judgment, and restore the motions judge’s
judgment.

II. Statement of Facts

[5] In the fall of 2008, the Atcon Group of
Companies (“Atcon”) — a New Brunswick-based
provider of construction, energy, industrial and
waste management services — was having difficulties
 meeting its financial obligations. The company
sought loans from the Bank of Nova Scotia, but it
needed loan guarantees from the Province to obtain
them.

[6] On April 24, 2009, the Province agreed to a
total of $50 million in loan guarantees, conditional
upon Atcon subjecting itself to an external review of
its assets by an auditing firm. The Province agreed
that Atcon’s auditor, Grant Thornton, could perform
the external review.

[7] A month later, on May 19, 2009, Grant Thornton
delivered a letter to the Province (“Opinion Letter”)
detailing the work it had done in performing its audit
of Atcon’s consolidated financial statements for the
fiscal year ending January 31, 2009 (“F2009”). In
the letter, Grant Thornton stated that it was carrying
out its audit in accordance with Generally Accepted
Auditing Standards and that it had some outstanding
712


matters to complete before issuing its audit report
(“Unqualified Auditors’ Report”).

[8] The Unqualified Auditors’ Report was delivered
 to the Province on June 18, 2009. In it, Grant
Thornton confirmed that it had reviewed Atcon’s
financial statements for F2009 in accordance with
Generally Accepted Auditing Standards, which
among other things, required it to “plan and perform
[the] audit to obtain reasonable assurance whether
the financial statements [were] free of material misstatement
” (R.R., at p. 26). Having done so, Grant
Thornton opined that Atcon’s statements presented
“fairly, in all material respects, the financial position
of [Atcon] as at January 31, 2009 and the results of its
operations and its cash flows for the year then ended
in accordance with Canadian generally accepted accounting
 principles” (ibid.). Grant Thornton attached
Atcon’s audited financial statements for F2009 to
the report.

[9] That satisfied the Province. On June 30, 2009,
relying upon the Opinion Letter, the Unqualified
Auditors’ Report and the audited financial statements
for F2009, the Province executed and delivered the
loan guarantees in the amount of $50 million to
Atcon, which, in turn, enabled the company to borrow
 funds from the Bank of Nova Scotia.

[10] Atcon’s financial difficulties persisted.
Operating losses and the shutdown of the company
’s Western Canada operations resulted in Atcon
running out of working capital by October 2009 — a
mere four months after receiving the loan guarantees
from the Province.

[11] Shortly thereafter, the Bank of Nova Scotia
applied for a receivership order with respect to Atcon
under the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act, R.S.C.
1985, c. B-3, and sought relief under the Companies’
Creditors Arrangement Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-36. On
March 1, 2010, the New Brunswick Court of Queen’s
Bench granted the Bank’s applications. A few days
713
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


later, the Bank called on the Province to pay out the
loan guarantees. On March 18, 2010, the Province
did — all $50 million.

[12] The proceedings against Atcon and the Bank’s
call on the loan guarantees concerned the Province.
Accordingly, in June 2010, it retained RSM Richter
Inc. (“Richter”), an accounting and auditing firm,
to review Atcon’s financial position for F2009, and
to issue a report on its findings (“Richter Report”).

[13] The Richter Report was issued in draft on
February 4, 2011, and finalized on November 30,
2012. Save for some grammatical corrections, the
final report was identical to the draft report.

[14] The findings in the Richter Report differed
from those in the Unqualified Auditors’ Report produced
 by Grant Thornton. Importantly, unlike Grant
Thornton, Richter opined that Atcon’s financial statements
 for F2009 had not, in fact, been prepared in
conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles. Richter formed this opinion based on
what it described to be a “systematic approach” by
Atcon’s management to “overstate assets, revenues
and profits, [and] understate liabilities, expenses
and losses” (A.R., vol. II, at p. 207). Specifically,
the report identified various errors in the financial
statements, which were considered to be “material”
because it is “probable” that the errors would have
influenced the decision of the person relying on the
financial statements (ibid., at p. 136 (emphasis deleted
)). In that regard, Richter estimated that Atcon’s
F2009 assets and net earnings were overstated by a
material amount, ranging between $28.3 million and
$35.4 million. Notably, in Grant Thornton’s audit
of Atcon, materiality was set at $1.2 million, which
placed the misstatements identified by Richter far
in excess of the materiality set by Grant Thornton
for its audit. Those misstatements, however, had not
714


been identified by Grant Thornton in the Unqualified
Auditors’ Report.

[15] This information triggered a response from
the Deputy Minister of Economic Development. In
a letter to the New Brunswick Institute of Chartered
Accountants dated December 21, 2012, the Deputy
Minister advised the Institute that the Province was
proceeding with a formal complaint against Grant
Thornton. A copy of the Richter Report was attached.

[16] A year and a half later, on June 23, 2014,
the Province commenced its claim alleging negligence
 against Grant Thornton. In its defence, Grant
Thornton denied the allegations. Further, it moved to
have the Province’s claim summarily dismissed on
the basis that it was barred by the two-year limitation
period under s. 5(1)(a) of the LAA.

III. Relevant Statutory Provisions

[17] The relevant provisions of the LAA are:

Definitions and interpretation

1(1) The following definitions apply in this Act.


“claim” means a claim to remedy the injury, loss or damage
 that occurred as a result of an act or omission.

                           ...

General limitation periods

5(1) Unless otherwise provided in this Act, no claim shall
be brought after the earlier of

   (a) two years from the day on which the claim is discovered
   , and
715
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


   (b) fifteen years from the day on which the act or
   omission on which the claim is based occurred.

5(2) A claim is discovered on the day on which the claim-
ant first knew or ought reasonably to have known

   (a) that the injury, loss or damage had occurred,

   (b) that the injury, loss or damage was caused by or
   contributed to by an act or omission, and

   (c) that the act or omission was that of the defendant.

IV. Proceedings Below

A. Court of Queen’s Bench of New Brunswick, 2019
   NBQB 36 (Grant J.)

[18] The main issue before the motions judge
was when, if ever, the Province discovered its claim
against Grant Thornton under s. 5 of the LAA. The
answer, in his view, lay in the proper interpretation
of s. 5(2).

[19] Under s. 5(2), the question, as he saw it, was
whether the Province “knew or ought to have known
that it had prima facie grounds to infer that it had
a potential cause of action against the defendants”
(para. 108 (CanLII)). If the Province had this knowledge
 more than two years before commencing its
claim on June 23, 2014, then the claim was statute-
barred by operation of the two-year limitation period
applicable under s. 5(1)(a).

[20] In the opinion of the motions judge, the
Province had the requisite knowledge by March 18,
2010. By then, it had suffered a loss by paying
$50 million to the Bank of Nova Scotia and it
could reasonably have inferred that Grant Thornton
caused or contributed to the act or omission giving
 rise to this loss. This, in the motions judge’s
view, gave the Province prima facie grounds to
716


infer the existence of a potential claim against
Grant Thornton. In the alternative, he found that
the Province had the requisite knowledge after it
received the draft Richter Report on February 4,
2011. Either way, he concluded that the Province
had failed to commence its claim within the two-
year limitation period applicable under s. 5(1)(a).
Hence, the claim was statute-barred.

[21] In the result, the motions judge granted summary
 judgment in favour of Grant Thornton and
dismissed the Province’s claim.

B. Court of Appeal of New Brunswick, 2020 NBCA
   18, 54 C.P.C. (8th) 271 (Drapeau, Quigg and
   Green JJ.A.)

[22] The Court of Appeal unanimously allowed the
appeal. It held that the motions judge “applied the
wrong legal test for s. 5(1)(a) purposes” and “made a
palpable and overriding error in finding the Province
discovered its claim more than two years before
proceedings were commenced” (paras. 81 and 127).

[23] Regarding the legal test, the court rejected
the motions judge’s test — “prima facie grounds to
infer . . . a potential cause of action” — on the basis
that it was not stringent enough (paras. 6-7 (emphasis
 deleted), quoting trial reasons, at para. 108).
Instead, the court set out what it believed to be the
correct and “more exacting” test, namely that “the
two-year limitation period begins to run the day after
 the plaintiff knows or ought reasonably to have
known facts that confer a legally enforceable right
to a remedy” (para. 7). In claims for negligence,
the court explained, “that right only exists if the
defendant was under a relevant duty of care and its
loss-causing act or omission fell below the applicable
standard of care” (para. 7).
717
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


[24] Applying that test, the court found that the
two- year limitation period under s. 5(1)(a) had
not been triggered because the Province had not
yet discovered its claim. Specifically, the Province
could not know whether Grant Thornton’s audit of
Atcon’s financial statements for F2009 fell below
the applicable standard of care by failing to com-
ply with Generally Accepted Auditing Standards.
According to the court, this essential component of
the Province’s negligence claim could not be known
unless and until Grant Thornton produced its audit-
related files for the Province’s inspection — some-
thing it had consistently refused to do. Without those
files, “the Province may suspect and allege, but it
does not know, actually or constructively, the F2009
audit was non-compliant with Generally Accepted
Auditing Standards” (para. 8). The motions judge’s
failure to consider the absence of evidence on that
issue constituted a “palpable and overriding error in
the assessment of the evidential record” (ibid.). This
accounted for his erroneous finding that the Province
discovered its claim on either March 18, 2010, or
February 4, 2011.

[25] On this basis, the court allowed the appeal and
set aside the summary judgment order.

V. Issues

[26] I would state the main issues in this case as
follows:
(1) What is the standard to be applied in determining
    whether a plaintiff has the requisite degree of
    knowledge to discover a claim under s. 5(2), so
    as to trigger the limitation period in s. 5(1)(a)?
(2) When, if ever, did the Province discover its negligence
     claim against Grant Thornton?
718


VI. Analysis

A. The Applicable Standard

[27] Section 5(1)(a) of the LAA sets out the limitation
 period that controls this case: a claim must
be commenced two years from the day on which
the claim is discovered. As the text of s. 5(2) makes
plain, a claim is discovered when a plaintiff knows
or ought reasonably to have known that an injury,
loss or damage occurred, which was caused or contributed
 to by an act or omission of the defendant.

[28] This case turns on the standard to be applied
in determining whether and when a plaintiff has the
requisite degree of knowledge to discover a claim under
 s. 5(2), thereby triggering the two-year limitation
period under s. 5(1)(a). In order to properly set the
standard, two distinct inquiries are required. First,
in assessing if the limitation period in s. 5(1)(a) has
been triggered, is the plaintiff’s state of knowledge
to be assessed in the same manner as the common
law rule of discoverability? Second, what is the particular
 degree of knowledge required to discover a
claim under s. 5(2)?

  (1) Codification of the Common Law Rule of
      Discoverability

[29] Section 5 of the LAA operates against the
backdrop of a common law discoverability rule that
is well-established. Under that rule, “a cause of action
 arises for purposes of a limitation period when
the material facts on which it is based have been
discovered or ought to have been discovered by the
plaintiff by the exercise of reasonable diligence”
(Central Trust Co. v. Rafuse, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 147, at
p. 224, citing Kamloops (City of) v. Nielsen, [1984]
2 S.C.R. 2; see also Ryan v. Moore, 2005 SCC 38,
719
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


[2005] 2 S.C.R. 53, at paras. 2 and 22). This rule
has its origins in equity. In particular, it seeks to
balance the three rationales for imposing limitation
periods — the guarantee of repose, the desire to
foreclose claims based on stale evidence and the
expectation that a plaintiff will start a claim in a
timely manner (M. (K.) v. M. (H.), [1992] 3 S.C.R. 6,
at pp. 29-30) — with the need to avoid the injustice
of precluding a claim before the plaintiff even has
knowledge of its existence (Peixeiro v. Haberman,
[1997] 3 S.C.R. 549, at para. 36).

[30] Though a “general rule”, the common law rule
does not apply to every statutory limitation period
(Ryan, at para. 23, quoting Rafuse, at p. 224). Rather,
it is an interpretive tool for construing limitations
statutes and, as such, it can be ousted by clear legislative
 language (Pioneer Corp. v. Godfrey, 2019
SCC 42, [2019] 3 S.C.R. 295, at para. 32). In that
regard, “many provincial legislatures have chosen to
enact statutory limitation periods that codify, limit or
oust entirely discoverability’s application” (ibid.).
Assessing whether a provincial legislature has codified
, limited or ousted the common law rule is a
matter of statutory interpretation (ibid., at para. 42,
citing Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re), [1998] 1 S.C.R.
27, at para. 21).

[31] In this case, Grant Thornton argues that
s. 5(1)(a) and (2) ousts or, at least, limits the common
 law discoverability rule. In its view, the New
Brunswick legislature provided for the limitation
period set out in s. 5(1)(a) to begin running when
a plaintiff has a lower degree of knowledge than
the common law rule requires, namely “a sufficient
basis, including by making reasonable inferences
based on their knowledge of having suffered a loss,
to plead an action against the defendant and start the
civil litigation process” (A.F., Grant Thornton LLP
and Kent M. Ostridge, at para. 87).
720


[32] With respect, I disagree. In my view, the New
Brunswick legislature chose to codify the common
law rule in s. 5(1)(a) and (2) of the LAA. This interpretation
 is supported by the words of s. 5, read
in their entire context and in their grammatical and
ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the
LAA, the object of the LAA, and the intention of the
legislature (see Rizzo & Rizzo, at para. 21).

[33] As set out at para. 17 above, the text of s. 5 of
the LAA reads as follows:

General limitation periods

5(1) Unless otherwise provided in this Act, no claim shall
be brought after the earlier of

   (a) two years from the day on which the claim is discovered
   , and

   (b) fifteen years from the day on which the act or
   omission on which the claim is based occurred.

5(2) A claim is discovered on the day on which the claim-
ant first knew or ought reasonably to have known

   (a) that the injury, loss or damage had occurred,

   (b) that the injury, loss or damage was caused by or
   contributed to by an act or omission, and

   (c) that the act or omission was that of the defendant.

[34] The plain words of this provision are unam-
biguous. Section 5(1)(a) provides that no claim shall
be brought after two years from the day on which the
claim is “discovered”. Section 5(2) further specifies
that a claim is discovered on the day that a claim-
ant knew or ought reasonably to have known the
facts that are material, namely the occurrence of an
injury, loss or damage that was caused or contributed
 to by an act or omission of the defendant. As
evidenced by the words of the provision, there is
721
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


no clear legislative language ousting or limiting the
common law rule; in fact, quite the opposite. The
event triggering the limitation period in s. 5(1)(a) is
linked to the state of the plaintiff’s knowledge in the
same manner as the common law rule.

[35] Moreover, there is nothing in the legislative
scheme or the object of the LAA that alters the governing
 principles set out in the common law rule.
The New Brunswick legislature enacted the general
limitation period scheme in s. 5 to simplify the law of
limitation periods. In doing so, it expressly modeled
s. 5 on similar limitation provisions found in Ontario,
Saskatchewan and Alberta (New Brunswick, Office
of the Attorney General, Commentary on Bill 28:
Limitation of Actions Act, January 2009 (online), at
pp. 1 and 4), all of which have been found to codify
the common law rule of discoverability (see, e.g.,
Galota v. Festival Hall Developments Ltd., 2016
ONCA 585, 133 O.R. (3d) 35, at para. 15; De Shazo
v. Nations Energy Co., 2005 ABCA 241, 48 Alta.
L.R. (4th) 25, at para. 26; Jardine v. Saskatoon Police
Service, 2017 SKQB 217, at para. 36 (CanLII)). The
legislature’s express intention to replicate provisions
that codify the common law rule is compelling evidence
 that New Brunswick intended to follow suit.

[36] In arguing that the legislature ousted the
common law rule, Grant Thornton points to some
linguistic differences between the common law rule
and s. 5. It emphasizes the fact that the common law
rule uses the term “cause of action”, whereas s. 5
uses the term “claim”. According to Grant Thornton,
these concepts are distinct: the former refers to a
set of facts entitling a plaintiff to a remedy from
the court, while the latter is “purely a limitations
concept” with “only two factual components (wrong-
ful conduct and resulting damage)” (A.F., Grant
Thornton LLP and Kent M. Ostridge, at para. 65,
quoting D. Zacks, “Claims, Not Causes of Action:
722


The Misapprehension of Limitations Principles”
(2018), 48 Advocates’ Q. 165, at p. 165).

[37] I recognize that the distinction between
“claim” and “cause of action” could be meaningful
in some circumstances; but in my view, it is not so
here. In fact, the LAA’s own wording shows that the
use of “claim” does not rule out a shared meaning
with “cause of action”. Section 1(1) defines a claim
as a “claim to remedy the injury, loss or damage that
occurred as a result of an act or omission”. In short,
s. 1(1) indicates that the legislature’s use of the term
“claim” focuses on a set of facts giving rise to a remedy
, which is the same meaning that Grant Thornton
attributes to the term “cause of action”.

[38] This interpretation is supported by the French
text of s. 5(2) of the LAA, which reads in part as
follows: “[l]es faits ayant donné naissance à la ré-
clamation sont découverts le jour où le réclamant
a appris ou aurait dû normalement apprendre”. In
addition, the French text of s. 1(1) defines “récla-
mation” as “[r]éclamation pour obtenir réparation
de préjudices, de pertes ou de dommages survenus
par suite d’un acte ou d’une omission”. As is ap-
parent, the wording of the French text supports my
interpretation of the English text, and confirms that
“claim” in s. 5 means “cause of action”, namely:
discovering the facts giving rise to a claim to obtain
relief for the injury, loss or damage that resulted
from an act or omission. This is the legal equivalent
of “a set of facts entitling a plaintiff to a remedy”,
the definition of a “cause of action” put forward by
Grant Thornton.

[39] More probative are the Hansard Debates
preceding the enactment of the LAA. When asked
723
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


why the statute uses the term “claim” instead of
“cause of action”, the Minister of Justice explained:

    In a sense, it is really just semantics. Tim Rattenbury,
who works for the Office of the Attorney General, and I
had a good discussion. The word “claim” is just another
way to characterize bringing forward your matter for purposes
 of litigation. “Cause of action” is the same thing.
The standardization of these particular ways of charac-
terizing an action before the courts is simply semantics.

(New Brunswick, Legislative Assembly, Journal of
Debates (Hansard), 3rd Sess., 56th Assem., June 17,
2009, at p. 50 (Hon. Mr. Burke))

In other words, according to the Minister, using
“claim” instead of “cause of action” amounts to a
distinction without a difference. While not in itself
determinative, the Minister’s statement can hardly be
taken as evidencing the “clear legislative language”
needed to oust or limit the common law rule (see
Godfrey, at para. 32). If anything, it demonstrates
the opposite.

[40] In sum, I am satisfied that s. 5(1)(a) and (2)
codifies the common law rule of discoverability. As
established by that rule and the LAA, the limitation
period is triggered when the plaintiff discovers or
ought to have discovered through the exercise of
reasonable diligence the material facts on which the
claim is based. Having so found, I turn now to ascer-
taining the particular degree of knowledge required
to discover a claim under s. 5.

  (2) The Requisite Degree of Knowledge

[41] As noted, the Court of Appeal disagreed with
the motions judge on the extent of knowledge required
 to discover a claim under s. 5. The motions
judge held that a plaintiff needs to know only enough
facts to have prima facie grounds to infer the existence
 of a potential claim. The Court of Appeal,
on the other hand, held that discovery of a claim
724


requires actual or constructive knowledge of facts
that confer a legally enforceable right to a judicial
remedy, which includes knowledge of every constituent
 element of the cause of action being pled. Thus,
on the Court of Appeal’s interpretation, in addition to
knowledge of a loss and causation, a claim in negligence
 would include knowledge of a duty of care as
well as knowledge of a breach of the standard of care.

[42] In my respectful view, neither approach ac-
curately describes the degree of knowledge required
under s. 5(2) to discover a claim and trigger the
limitation period in s. 5(1)(a). I propose the following
 approach instead: a claim is discovered when a
plaintiff has knowledge, actual or constructive, of
the material facts upon which a plausible inference
of liability on the defendant’s part can be drawn.
This approach, in my view, remains faithful to the
common law rule of discoverability set out in Rafuse
and accords with s. 5 of the LAA.

[43] By way of explanation, the material facts that
must be actually or constructively known are generally
 set out in the limitation statute. Here, they
are listed in s. 5(2)(a) to (c). Pursuant to s. 5(2), a
claim is discovered when the plaintiff has actual or
constructive knowledge that: (a) the injury, loss or
damage occurred; (b) the injury loss or damage was
caused by or contributed to by an act or omission;
and (c) the act or omission was that of the defendant.
This list is cumulative, not disjunctive. For instance,
knowledge of a loss, without more, is insufficient to
trigger the limitation period.

[44] In assessing the plaintiff’s state of knowledge,
both direct and circumstantial evidence can be used.
725
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


Moreover, a plaintiff will have constructive knowledge
 when the evidence shows that the plaintiff ought
to have discovered the material facts by exercising
reasonable diligence. Suspicion may trigger that
exercise (Crombie Property Holdings Ltd. v. McColl-
Frontenac Inc., 2017 ONCA 16, 406 D.L.R. (4th)
252, at para. 42).

[45] Finally, the governing standard requires the
plaintiff to be able to draw a plausible inference of
liability on the part of the defendant from the material
 facts that are actually or constructively known.
In this particular context, determining whether a
plausible inference of liability can be drawn from the
material facts that are known is the same assessment
as determining whether a plaintiff “had all of the material
 facts necessary to determine that [it] had prima
facie grounds for inferring [liability on the part of the
defendant]” (Brown v. Wahl, 2015 ONCA 778, 128
O.R. (3d) 583, at para. 7; see also para. 8, quoting
Lawless v. Anderson, 2011 ONCA 102, 276 O.A.C.
75, at para. 30). Although the question in both circumstances
 is whether the plaintiff’s knowledge of
the material facts gives rise to an inference that the
defendant is liable, I prefer to use the term plausible
inference because in civil litigation, there does not
appear to be a universal definition of what qualifies
as prima facie grounds. As the British Columbia
Court of Appeal observed in Insurance Corporation
of British Columbia v. Mehat, 2018 BCCA 242, 11
B.C.L.R. (6th) 217, at para. 77:

As noted in Sopinka, Lederman & Bryant: The Law of
Evidence in Canada, some cases equate prima facie proof
to a situation where the evidence gives rise to a permissible
fact inference; others equate prima facie proof to a case
where the evidence gives rise to a compelled fact determi-
nation, absent evidence to the contrary. [Citation omitted.]

Since the term prima facie can carry different mean-
ings, using plausible inference in the present context
726


ensures consistency. A plausible inference is one
which gives rise to a “permissible fact inference”.

[46] The plausible inference of liability require-
ment ensures that the degree of knowledge needed
to discover a claim is more than mere suspicion or
speculation. This accords with the principles under-
lying the discoverability rule, which recognize that it
is unfair to deprive a plaintiff from bringing a claim
before it can reasonably be expected to know the
claim exists. At the same time, requiring a plausible
inference of liability ensures the standard does not
rise so high as to require certainty of liability (Kowal
v. Shyiak, 2012 ONCA 512, 296 O.A.C. 352) or “perfect
 knowledge” (De Shazo, at para. 31; see also the
concept of “perfect certainty” in Hill v. South Alberta
Land Registration District (1993), 8 Alta. L.R. (3d)
379, at para. 8). Indeed, it is well established that a
plaintiff does not need to know the exact extent or
type of harm it has suffered, or the precise cause
of its injury, in order for a limitation period to run
(HOOPP Realty Inc. v. Emery Jamieson LLP, 2018
ABQB 276, 27 C.P.C. (8th) 83, at para. 213, citing
Peixeiro, at para. 18).

[47] In my respectful view, endorsing the Court of
Appeal’s approach that to discover a claim, a plaintiff
 needs knowledge of facts that confer a legally
enforceable right to a judicial remedy, including
knowledge of the constituent elements of a claim,
would move the needle too close to certainty. A plausible
 inference of liability is enough; it strikes the
equitable balance of interests that the common law
rule of discoverability seeks to achieve.

[48] It follows that in a claim alleging negligence, a
plaintiff does not need knowledge that the defendant
727
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


owed it a duty of care or that the defendant’s act
or omission breached the applicable standard of
care. Finding otherwise could have the unintended
consequence of indefinitely postponing the limitation
 period. After all, knowledge that the defendant
breached the standard of care is often only discern-
able through the document discovery process or the
exchange of expert reports, both of which typically
occur after the plaintiff has commenced a claim. As
the Court stated in K.L.B. v. British Columbia, 2003
SCC 51, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 403, at para. 55:

Since the purpose of the rule of reasonable discoverability
is to ensure that plaintiffs have sufficient awareness of
the facts to be able to bring an action, the relevant type of
awareness cannot be one that it is possible to lack even
after one has brought an action. [Emphasis added.]

Although the Court in K.L.B. was dealing with discoverability
 in a different context, the basic principle
is relevant here. The standard cannot be so high as to
make it possible for a plaintiff to acquire the requisite
knowledge only through discovery or experts. And
yet, that is precisely the standard endorsed by the
Court of Appeal in the instant case. With respect, that
standard sets the bar too high. By the same token, the
standard is not as low as the standard needed to ward
off an application to strike a claim. What is required
is actual or constructive knowledge of the material
facts from which a plausible inference can be made
that the defendant acted negligently.

B. Application to the Facts

[49] With this approach in mind, I turn to the question
 of determining when, if ever, the Province discovered
 its claim against Grant Thornton.
728


[50] Grant Thornton submits that the Province
discovered its claim on February 4, 2011, when it received
 the draft Richter Report. I agree. At that point,
the Province had actual or constructive knowledge of
the material facts — namely, that a loss occurred and
that the loss was caused or contributed to by an act
or omission of Grant Thornton. Nothing more was
needed to draw a plausible inference of negligence.

  (1) The Province Had Knowledge of the Material
      Facts

[51] The first aspect of the governing standard
requires an assessment of the Province’s knowledge
 of the material facts. It is undisputable that
by February 4, 2011, the Province knew that it had
suffered a loss. In fact, it knew on March 18, 2010,
when it paid out the loan guarantees to the Bank of
Nova Scotia — all $50 million. Moreover, based on
the record, I am able to conclude that on February 4,
2011, the Province knew or, at least, ought reasonably
 to have known, that the loss was caused or contributed
 to by an act or omission of Grant Thornton.

[52] The Province’s willingness to go along with
Atcon’s request for loan guarantees totalling $50 million
 was conditional on Grant Thornton’s external
audit of Atcon’s consolidated financial statements for
F2009. After completing its audit, Grant Thornton
represented to the Province in the Unqualifi ed
Auditors’ Report that it had audited Atcon’s financial
statements in accordance with Generally Accepted
Auditing Standards and that, having done so, it was
of the opinion that they presented “fairly, in all material
 respects, the financial position of [Atcon] as
at January 31, 2009 and the results of its operations
and its cash flows for the year then ended in accordance
 with Canadian generally accepted accounting
principles” (R.R., at p. 26). The Province relied on
those representations to execute the loan guarantees.
729
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


[53] Just over four months after receiving the
loan guarantees, Atcon ran out of working capital,
which led the Bank of Nova Scotia to commence
bankruptcy and insolvency proceedings against it.
Counsel for the Attorney General of New Brunswick
attended some of the hearings and, as a result, the
Province became privy to those proceedings. Indeed,
the Province was aware that on March 1, 2010, the
court granted the Bank’s applications and placed
Atcon into receivership.

[54] Shortly thereafter, on March 18, 2010, the
Bank called upon the Province to pay out on the loan
guarantees. This raised alarm bells for the Province
about the true state of Atcon’s financial affairs because
 a few months later, it retained Richter to review
 and comment on Atcon’s financial position for
F2009.

[55] Richter undertook this review and on February
 4, 2011, issued the 88-page draft Richter Report.
In my view, the Province’s knowledge about its potential
 claim crystallized at this point.

[56] In this report, Richter opined that Atcon’s financial
 statements for F2009 had not been prepared
in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles in all material respects. Richter formed
this opinion based on what it described to be a “systematic
 approach” by Atcon’s management to “overstate
 assets, revenues and profits, [and] understate
liabilities, expenses and losses” (A.R., vol. II, at
p. 207). Specifically, Richter identified various errors
 in the financial statements, which, as Richter
explained, were considered to be “material” because
they would likely have influenced the decision of
the person relying on the financial statements. In
that regard, Richter estimated that Atcon’s F2009
assets and net earnings were overstated by an amount
ranging between $28.3 million and $35.4 million.
Since Richter set the materiality for Atcon’s financial
statements in the range of $1.3 million to $2.6 million
, this placed the misstatements approximately 14
to 22 times greater than the acceptable materiality
730


that was set. For Grant Thornton’s audit of Atcon,
materiality was set at $1.2 million, which also clearly
placed the misstatements well in excess of materiality
.

[57] While Richter’s mandate did not include com-
menting on whether Grant Thornton’s audit had been
performed in accordance with Generally Accepted
Auditing Standards, its mandate was similar to Grant
Thornton’s: both were retained by the Province to
determine whether Atcon’s fi nancial statements
had been prepared in accordance with Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles. Grant Thornton’s
conclusion that the statements had been prepared
in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles, which indicated its belief that they were
not materially misstated, stands in stark contrast to
Richter’s findings that not only were the financial
statements misstated, those misstatements signifi-
cantly exceeded the materiality threshold established
for the audit. The magnitude of the misstatements —
assets and net earnings were overstated by an amount
ranging between $28.3 million and $35.4 million —
is even more striking when they are considered in
the context of loan guarantees totalling $50 million.

[58] It stands to reason from the findings made
in the Richter Report, considered in light of all
the surrounding circumstances, that the Province
knew or ought to have known that Grant Thornton’s
act or omission caused or contributed to its loss.
Specifically, Grant Thornton’s act or omission was
issuing the Unqualified Auditors’ Report with respect
to Atcon’s financial statements for F2009, despite
those statements not being prepared in accordance
with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
and not fairly representing, in all material respects,
Atcon’s financial position for F2009. This act or
omission caused or contributed to the Province’s
loss because the Province executed the $50 million
731
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


loan guarantees in reliance on Grant Thornton’s representations
.

  (2) The Province Could Have Drawn a Plausible
      Inference of Negligence

[59] Based on all of the material facts that the
Province knew or ought to have known, I am able to
conclude that by February 4, 2011, the Province had
sufficient knowledge to draw a plausible inference
that Grant Thornton had been negligent.

[60] The Province maintains that the limitation
period did not begin to run on February 4, 2011. It
contends that, to this day, the limitation period has
not yet started to run because it does not have access
to Grant Thornton’s audit-related files and thus, it
cannot know whether Grant Thornton breached the
applicable standard of care by failing to conduct
the audit in accordance with Generally Accepted
Auditing Standards. This, despite the fact that the
Province went ahead and filed its claim many years
ago, on June 23, 2014, and despite its concession
that it did so without learning any new information
about Grant Thornton’s conduct between that date
and February 4, 2011, the date it received the draft
Richter Report.

[61] With respect, I disagree with the Province’s
position. As I have explained, a plaintiff does not
need knowledge of all the constituent elements of
negligence to discover its claim. All that is required is
knowledge of the material facts, as set out in the LAA,
from which a plausible inference of liability can be
drawn. Contrary to its assertions, the Province did not
need access to Grant Thornton’s audit-related files
to plausibly infer that Grant Thornton had breached
the applicable standard of care by failing to conduct
the audit in accordance with Generally Accepted
Auditing Standards. In particular, from the material
misstatements identified in the Richter Report, referred
 to above at paras. 56-57, the Province could
have inferred that the loss was the fruit of an audit
732


that fell below the applicable standards, which require
 auditors to “plan and perform an audit to obtain
reasonable assurance whether the financial statements
 are free of material misstatement” (R.R., at
p. 26).

[62] In sum, having regard to the material facts that
I have identified, which the Province knew or ought
to have known, the Province had ample knowledge
as of February 4, 2011, to draw a plausible inference
that Grant Thornton had acted negligently. This does
not mean that Grant Thornton was in fact negligent
. That question would have been for trial, had
the Province brought its claim within the limitation
period.

VII. Conclusion

[63] In conclusion, I am satisfied that the Province
discovered its claim on February 4, 2011, more than
two years before commencing it on June 23, 2014.
The Province’s claim is therefore statute-barred by
s. 5(1)(a) of the LAA.

[64] Accordingly, the appeal brought by Grant
Thornton LLP and Kent M. Ostridge and the appeal
brought by Grant Thornton International Ltd. are
both allowed. The judgment of the Court of Appeal
is set aside and the judgment of the motions judge in
the Court of Queen’s Bench is restored.1 The appellants
 are entitled to their costs throughout.

    Appeals allowed with costs throughout.


1
    Since I am disposing of these appeals on the basis of evidence that
    was properly before the motions judge, I decline to consider the
    Province’s proposed disposition (see R.F., at para. 145), to remit
    the matter back to the Court of Appeal to address the alternative
    grounds of appeal relating to the motions judge’s evidentiary
    rulings, which were raised before that court but not decided (see
    C.A. reasons, at paras. 80-81).
733
[2021] 2 R.C.S.


  Solicitors for the appellants Grant Thornton LLP
and Kent M. Ostridge: Lenczner Slaght Royce Smith
Griffin, Toronto; McInnes Cooper, Fredericton.

   Solicitors for the appellant Grant Thornton International
 Ltd.: Foster & Company, Fredericton.

   Solicitors for the respondent: Stewart McKelvey,
Fredericton.

  Solicitors for the intervener: Borden Ladner
Gervais, Toronto.
