                                           CITATION: Jones v. Tsige, 2012 ONCA 32
                                                                  DATE: 20120118
                                                                 DOCKET: C53577

                     COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO


               Winkler C.J.O., Sharpe J.A. & Cunningham A.C.J. (ad hoc)

BETWEEN

                                    Sandra Jones

                                                                  Plaintiff (Appellant)

                                         and

                                    Winnie Tsige

                                                               Defendant (Respondent)

Christopher Du Vernet and Carlin McGoogan, for the appellant


Alex Cameron and N. Melanson, for the respondent


Heard: September 29, 2011

On appeal from the judgment of Justice Kevin M.V. Whitaker of the Superior Court of
Justice dated March 23, 2011, with reasons reported at 2011 ONSC 1475, 333 D.L.R.
(4th) 566.


Sharpe J.A.:

[1]   Does Ontario law recognize a right to bring a civil action for damages for the

invasion of personal privacy?
                                         Page: 2



[2]    In July 2009, the appellant, Sandra Jones, discovered that the respondent, Winnie

Tsige, had been surreptitiously looking at Jones‟ banking records. Tsige and Jones did

not know each other despite the fact that they both worked for the same bank and Tsige

had formed a common-law relationship with Jones‟ former husband. As a bank

employee, Tsige had full access to Jones‟ banking information and, contrary to the bank‟s

policy, looked into Jones‟ banking records at least 174 times over a period of four years.

[3]    The central issue on this appeal is whether the motion judge erred by granting

summary judgment and dismissing Jones‟ claim for damages on the ground that Ontario

law does not recognize the tort of breach of privacy.

FACTS

[4]    Jones and Tsige worked at different branches of the Bank of Montreal (“BMO”).

Jones maintains her primary bank account there. Jones and Tsige did not know or work

with each other. However, Tsige became involved in a relationship with Jones‟ former

husband. For about four years, Tsige used her workplace computer to access Jones‟

personal BMO bank accounts at least 174 times. The information displayed included

transactions details, as well as personal information such as date of birth, marital status

and address. Tsige did not publish, distribute or record the information in any way.

[5]    Jones became suspicious that Tsige was accessing her account and complained to

BMO. When confronted by BMO, Tsige admitted that she had looked at Jones‟ banking

information, that she had no legitimate reason for viewing the information and that she
                                          Page: 3



understood it was contrary to BMO‟s Code of Business Conduct and Ethics and her

professional responsibility. Tsige explained then, and maintains in this action, that she

was involved in a financial dispute with the appellant‟s former husband and accessed the

accounts to confirm whether he was paying child support to the appellant. Jones does not

accept that explanation as she says it is inconsistent with the timing and frequency of

Tsige‟s snooping.

[6]    Tsige has apologized for her actions and insists that she has ceased looking at

Jones‟ banking information. Tsige is contrite and embarrassed by her actions. BMO

disciplined Tsige by suspending her for one week without pay and denying her a bonus.

[7]    In her statement of claim, Jones asserts that her privacy interest in her confidential

banking information has been “irreversibly destroyed” and claims damages of $70,000

for invasion of privacy and breach of fiduciary duty, and punitive and exemplary

damages of $20,000.

1. Motions for summary judgment
[8]    Jones proceeded under the simplified procedure of Rule 76 of the Rules of Civil

Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, and moved for summary judgment. Tsige brought a

cross-motion for summary judgment to dismiss the action.

[9]    The motion judge found that Tsige did not owe Jones a fiduciary obligation and

dismissed that claim. Jones has not appealed that finding.

[10]   The motion judge then reviewed the jurisprudence concerning the existence of a

tort of invasion of privacy. He observed that recent Superior Court decisions have refused
                                        Page: 4



to strike out such claims at the pleading stage and that some academic writing indicates

that that the tort may exist.

[11]   The motion judge concluded, however, that the statement of Cronk J.A. in

Euteneier v. Lee (2005), 77 O.R. (3d) 621 (C.A.), leave to appeal refused, [2005]

S.C.C.A. No. 516, at para. 63, is, in his words, “binding and dispositive of the question”

of whether the tort of invasion of privacy exists at common law in Ontario. Euteneier

concerned a lawsuit brought by a woman whose clothes were forcibly removed by police

following her suicide attempt while she was detained in a holding cell. In considering

whether the trial judge had accurately described the plaintiff‟s privacy and dignity

interests, Cronk J.A. observed, at para. 63, “[the plaintiff] properly conceded in oral

argument before this court that there is no „free-standing‟ right to dignity or privacy

under the Charter or at common law.”

[12]   The motion judge added that given the existence of privacy legislation protecting

certain rights, any expansion of those rights should be dealt with by statute rather than

common law.

[13]   The motion judge dismissed Jones‟ motion for summary judgment and granted the

motion brought by Tsige. He rejected Jones‟ submission that costs should be denied on

the ground that the issue was novel and that Tsige‟s conduct was objectionable. The

motion judge felt that Jones had pursued the litigation aggressively and failed to accept

reasonable settlement offers. He awarded costs fixed at $35,000.
                                          Page: 5



ISSUES

[14]   Jones appeals to this court, raising the following issues:

       1. Did the motion judge err in holding that Ontario law does not
          recognize a cause of action for invasion of privacy?

       2. Did the motion judge err with respect to costs?

ANALYSIS

Issue 1. Does Ontario law recognize a cause of action for invasion of privacy?

a) Introduction
[15]   The question of whether the common law should recognize a cause of action in

tort for invasion of privacy has been debated for the past one hundred and twenty years.

Aspects of privacy have long been protected by causes of action such as breach of

confidence, defamation, breach of copyright, nuisance, and various property rights.

Although the individual‟s privacy interest is a fundamental value underlying such claims,

the recognition of a distinct right of action for breach of privacy remains uncertain. As

Adams J. stated in Ontario (Attorney General) v. Dieleman (1994), 117 D.L.R. (4th) 449

(Ont. Gen. Div.) at p. 688, after a comprehensive review of the case law, “invasion of

privacy in Canadian common law continues to be an inceptive, if not ephemeral, legal

concept, primarily operating to extend the margins of existing tort doctrine.”

[16]   Canadian, English and American courts and commentators almost invariably take

the seminal articles of S.D. Warren & L.D. Brandeis, “The Right to Privacy” (1890) 4

Harv. L. R. 193 and William L. Prosser, “Privacy” (1960), 48 Cal. L. R. 383 as their

starting point.
                                              Page: 6



[17]   Warren and Brandeis argued for the recognition of a right of privacy to meet the

problems posed by technological and social change that saw “instantaneous photographs”

and “newspaper enterprise” invade “the sacred precincts of private life” (at p. 195). They

identified the “general right of the individual to be let alone”, the right to “inviolate

personality” (at p. 205), “the more general right to the immunity of the person” and “the

right to one‟s personality” (at p. 207) as fundamental values underlying such well-known

causes of action as breach of confidence, defamation and breach of copyright. They urged

that open recognition of a right of privacy was well-supported by these underlying legal

values and required to meet the changing demands of the society in which they lived.

[18]   Professor Prosser‟s article picked up the threads of the American jurisprudence

that had developed in the seventy years following the influential Warren and Brandeis

article. Prosser argued that what had emerged from the hundreds of cases he canvassed

was not one tort, but four, tied together by a common theme and name, but comprising

different elements and protecting different interests. Prosser delineated a four-tort

catalogue, summarized as follows, at p. 389:


       1. Intrusion upon the plaintiff‟s seclusion or solitude, or into his private affairs.


       2. Public disclosure of embarrassing private facts about the plaintiff.

       3. Publicity which places the plaintiff in a false light in the public eye.

       4. Appropriation, for the defendant‟s advantage, of the plaintiff‟s name or likeness.
                                           Page: 7



[19]   Most American jurisdictions now accept Prosser‟s classification and it has also

been adopted by the Restatement (Second) of Torts (2010). The tort that is most relevant

to this case, the tort of “intrusion upon seclusion”, is described by the Restatement, at §

652B as:

              One who intentionally intrudes, physically or otherwise, upon
              the seclusion of another or his private affairs or concerns, is
              subject to liability to the other for invasion of his privacy, if
              the invasion would be highly offensive to a reasonable
              person.

[20]   The comment section of the Restatement elaborates this proposition and explains

that the tort includes physical intrusions into private places as well as listening or

looking, with or without mechanical aids, into the plaintiff‟s private affairs. Of particular

relevance to this appeal, is the observation that other non-physical forms of investigation

or examination into private concerns may be actionable. These include opening private

and personal mail or examining a private bank account, “even though there is no

publication or other use of any kind” of the information obtained.

[21]   If Jones has a right of action, it falls into Prosser‟s first category of intrusion upon

seclusion. While I will make some reference to the fourth category of appropriation of the

plaintiff‟s name or likeness in my discussion below, I will focus primarily on intrusion

upon seclusion. I do so for two reasons. First, I accept Prosser‟s insight that the general

right to privacy embraces four distinct torts, each with its own considerations and rules,

and that confusion may result from a failure to maintain appropriate analytic distinctions

between the categories. Second, as a court of law, we should restrict ourselves to the
                                           Page: 8



particular issues posed by the facts of the case before us and not attempt to decide more

than is strictly necessary to decide that case. A cause of action of any wider breadth

would not only over-reach what is necessary to resolve this case, but could also amount

to an unmanageable legal proposition that would, as Prosser warned, breed confusion and

uncertainty.

[22]   The following discussion will examine whether the common law recognizes a

cause of action for invasion of privacy. I will canvass case law from Ontario and other

provinces and examine federal and provincial legislation relating to privacy. For

completeness, I will also discuss the state of the law in foreign jurisdictions.

b) Case law
[23]   Reflecting on Canadian jurisprudence, Allen M. Linden and Bruce Feldthusen,

Canadian Tort Law, 9th ed. (Toronto: LexisNexis, 2011) observed at p. 59, that “[w]e

seem to be drifting closer to the American model.” See also Colin H.H. McNairn and

Alexander K. Scott, Privacy Law in Canada (Toronto: Butterworths, 2001) at ch. 3;

Barbara McIsaac, Rick Shields and Kris Klein, The Law of Privacy in Canada, looseleaf

(Toronto: Carswell, 2000) at 2.4; Philip Osborne, The Law of Torts, 4th ed. (Toronto:

Irwin Law, 2011) at pp. 267-71.

[24]   My analysis of the case law supports the same conclusion: Ontario has already

accepted the existence of a tort claim for appropriation of personality and, at the very

least, remains open to the proposition that a tort action will lie for an intrusion upon

seclusion.
                                          Page: 9



       i) Ontario case law
[25]   In Canada, there has been no definitive statement from an appellate court on the

issue of whether there is a common law right of action corresponding to the intrusion on

seclusion category. Ontario trial judges have, however, often refused to dismiss such

claims at the pleading stage as disclosing no cause of action and some have awarded

damages for claims based on violations of the right to be free of intrusion upon seclusion.

The clear trend in the case law is, at the very least, to leave open the possibility that such

a cause of action does exist.

[26]   Saccone v. Orr (1981), 34 O.R. (2d) 317 (Co. Ct.), for example, involved the

recording of a private conversation without the knowledge or consent of the plaintiff. The

recording was then played at a municipal council meeting and a transcript of the

conversation published in a local newspaper. Jacob Co. Ct. J. dismissed the defendant‟s

argument against the existence of a tort of invasion of privacy, found in favour of the

plaintiff and awarded damages of $500.

[27]   Roth v. Roth (1991), 4 O.R. (3d) 740 (Gen. Div) involved interference with the

plaintiffs‟ ability to use and enjoy their cottage property. Mandel J. considered the

application of several torts – assault, battery, nuisance and trespass – but found that the

cumulative effect of the defendants‟ actions could best be described as an invasion of

privacy. He rejected the contention that the common law did not allow for a claim for

invasion of privacy and held, at p. 743, that the common law should not be confined to

existing categories but must evolve. In recognizing the right of privacy, Mandel J. quoted
                                           Page: 10



a passage from a leading torts text indicating that liability for breach of privacy should

only be imposed where the intrusion is substantial and would be regarded as offensive

and intolerable to a person of reasonable sensitivity. He then stated, at p. 758, “whether

the invasion of privacy of an individual will be actionable will depend on the

circumstances of the particular case and the conflicting rights involved.”

[28]   A third trial judgment to award damages for breach of privacy falls under

Prosser‟s fourth category of appropriation of the plaintiff‟s name or likeness. Athans v.

Canadian Adventure Camps Ltd. (1977), 17 O.R. (2d) 425 (H.C.J.) involved a claim by

an expert water-skier against a public relations firm that had copied a distinctive

photograph of the plaintiff water skiing. Henry J. relied on Krouse v. Chrysler (1973), 1

O.R. (2d) 225 (Ont. C.A.) in which Estey J.A. had suggested that an action in tort for the

appropriation of personality did exist under the common law of Ontario. Henry J. held

that the plaintiff failed to make out the tort of passing off, but did have a claim for the tort

of “appropriation of personality”. The plaintiff recovered damages measured by the

amount the plaintiff ought reasonably to have received in the market for permission to

use his image.

[29]   There are also several Ontario cases in which the trial judge refused to strike

pleadings alleging the tort of invasion of privacy as disclosing no cause of action.

[30]   Somwar v. McDonald’s Restaurants of Canada Ltd. (2006), 79 O.R. (3d) 172

(S.C.) contains perhaps the most coherent and definitive pronouncement in Ontario
                                         Page: 11



jurisprudence of the existence of a common law tort of invasion of privacy corresponding

to the intrusion upon seclusion category. Somwar accused his employer, McDonald‟s

Restaurants, of unlawfully invading his privacy by conducting a credit bureau check on

him without his consent. The plaintiff claimed damages for invasion of privacy and for

punitive damages. The defendant moved to strike the statement of claim and dismiss the

plaintiff‟s action on the basis that it did not disclose a reasonable cause of action under

rule 21.01(1)(b) of the Rules of Civil Procedure.

[31]   Stinson J. reviewed the Ontario case law and observed that while the cases were

not entirely consistent, even where the courts did not accept the existence of a privacy

tort, they rarely went so far as to rule out the potential of such a tort. The body of case

law, together with the recognition by the Supreme Court of Canada of the protection of

privacy under s.8 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms led him to conclude

at para. 29 and 31:

              With advancements in technology, personal data of an
              individual can now be collected, accessed (properly and
              improperly) and disseminated more easily than ever before.
              There is a resulting increased concern in our society about the
              risk of unauthorized access to an individual's personal
              information. The traditional torts such as nuisance, trespass
              and harassment may not provide adequate protection against
              infringement of an individual's privacy interests. Protection of
              those privacy interests by providing a common law remedy
              for their violation would be consistent with Charter values
              and an "incremental revision" and logical extension of the
              existing jurisprudence.

              …
                                          Page: 12



              Even if the plaintiff's claim for invasion of privacy were
              classified as "novel" (which, in any event, is not a proper
              basis for dismissing it), the foregoing analysis leads me to
              conclude that the time has come to recognize invasion of
              privacy as a tort in its own right. It therefore follows that it is
              neither plain nor obvious that the plaintiff's action cannot
              succeed on the basis that he has not pleaded a reasonable
              cause of action.

[32]   Somwar was followed in Nitsopoulos v. Wong (2008) 298 D.L.R. (4th) 265 (Ont.

S.C.). See also Capan v. Capan (1980), 14 C.C.L.T. 191 (Ont. H.C.); Lipiec v. Borsa

(1996), 31 C.C.L.T. (2d) 294 (Ont. Gen. Div.); Shred-Tech Corp. v. Viveen, 2006

CarswellOnt 7762 (Ont. S.C.) at para. 30. Compare Haskett v. Trans Union of Canada

Inc. (2002), 10 C.C.L.T. (3d) 128 (Ont. S.C.).

       ii) Provincial case law
[33]   While there appears to be no appellate decision from another province definitively

establishing a common law right of action for intrusion upon seclusion, dicta in at least

two cases support the idea. In Motherwell v. Motherwell (1976), 73 D.L.R. (3d) 62 (Alta.

S.C. App. Div.), a case involving harassing telephone calls, the court held the plaintiff

had a right of action in nuisance but added, at para. 25, that “the interests of our

developing jurisprudence would be better served by approaching invasion of privacy by

abuse of the telephone system as a new category, rather than seeking by rationalization to

enlarge” the existing categories of nuisance.

[34]   The issue in Dyne Holdings Ltd. v. Royal Insurance Co. of Canada (1996), 135

D.L.R. (4th) 142, leave to appeal to S.C.C. refused, [1996] S.C.C.A. No. 344, was an

insurer‟s duty to defend. One aspect of the claim arguably amounted to an invasion of
                                         Page: 13



privacy akin to the category of intrusion upon exclusion. After a review of the

jurisprudence, Carruthers C.J. observed, at p. 160: “the courts in Canada are not far from

recognizing a common law right to privacy if they have not already done so. It is also

clear that Canadian courts do not hesitate to protect privacy interests under some

recognized tort.”

       iii) Euteneier v. Lee
[35]   This brings me to Euteneier v. Lee, and the statement from the case that the

motion judge here found to be dispositive. In my respectful view, the motion judge‟s

reliance on Euteneier for the proposition Ontario law excludes any and all claims for

breach of privacy interests was misplaced. The plaintiff in Euteneier had been arrested

and detained on criminal charges. She complained of her treatment while in police

custody and sought damages for negligence, assault, civil conspiracy, and breach of her

ss. 7, 9, 12, and 15 rights under the Charter. The trial judge found that based on the

appellant‟s own behaviour while in custody, which included an apparent suicide attempt,

the defendant police officers had conducted themselves in a reasonable and prudent

manner. They had breached no duty nor exhibited any bad faith or malice to ground any

of the claims she had asserted and the claim was dismissed.

[36]   The plaintiff‟s first appeal was to the Divisional Court on account of the quantum

of damages assessed by the trial judge: see Euteneier v. Lee (2003), 113 C.R.R. (2d) 44

(Ont. Div. Ct.). The Divisional Court allowed the appeal in part. A new trial was ordered

on the issue of whether, after disrobing the plaintiff to prevent her from continuing to use
                                          Page: 14



articles of clothing to hang herself, the police were negligent, committed assault, or

breached the plaintiff‟s Charter rights “by confining her in the [holding cell] and by

handcuffing her to its bars without taking steps to maintain her dignity or to prevent her

humiliation.”

[37]   The defendants appealed the order for a new trial to this court and the plaintiff

cross-appealed seeking a new trial on all issues. This court allowed the appeal and

dismissed the cross-appeal. Cronk J.A., writing for the court, held that the Divisional

Court had failed to apply the proper standard of review with respect to the trial judge‟s

factual findings. Of particular significance to the point at issue on this appeal is Cronk

J.A.‟s observation, at paras. 47 and 56. She noted that the plaintiff did not plead that that

the defendants owed her any duty to maintain her dignity and prevent her humiliation,

and that any reference to her dignity or privacy interests were as particulars of other

causes of action or as the consequences she alleged flowed from the actions of the

defendants. Cronk J.A. held that the Divisional Court had erred in treating those

allegations as stand-alone causes of action.

[38]   Accordingly, it is clear from the context and from the words used that the passage

at para. 63 relied on by the motion judge – “[the plaintiff] properly conceded in oral

argument before this court that there is no „free standing‟ right to dignity or privacy under

the Charter or at common law” – could not have been intended to express any dispositive

or definitive opinion as to the existence of a tort claim for breach of a privacy interest. No
                                         Page: 15



such claim had been advanced by the plaintiff, no argument on that point was addressed

by counsel, and in my view, no opinion on that point was expressed by this court.

c) Charter Jurisprudence
[39]   Charter jurisprudence identifies privacy as being worthy of constitutional

protection and integral to an individual‟s relationship with the rest of society and the

state. The Supreme Court of Canada has consistently interpreted the Charter’s s. 8

protection against unreasonable search and seizure as protecting the underlying right to

privacy. In Hunter v. Southam Inc., [1984] 2 S.C.R. 145, at p. 158-59, Dickson J. adopted

the purposive method of Charter interpretation and observed that the interests engaged by

s. 8 are not simply an extension of the concept of trespass, but rather are grounded in an

independent right to privacy held by all citizens.

[40]   In R. v. Dyment, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 417 at p. 427, La Forest J. characterized the s. 8

protection of privacy as “[g]rounded in a man‟s physical and moral autonomy” and stated

that “privacy is essential for the well-being of the individual. For this reason alone, it is

worthy of constitutional protection, but it also has profound significance for the public

order.” La Forest added, at p. 429:

              In modern society, especially, retention of information about
              oneself is extremely important. We may, for one reason or
              another, wish or be compelled to reveal such information, but
              situations abound where the reasonable expectations of the
              individual that the information shall remain confidential to
              the persons to whom, and restricted to the purposes for which
              it is divulged, must be protected.
                                           Page: 16



[41]   Charter jurisprudence has recognized three distinct privacy interests: Dyment at

pp. 428-9; R. v. Tessling, 2004 SCC 67, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 432, at paras. 19-23. The first

two interests, personal privacy and territorial privacy, are deeply rooted in the common

law. Personal privacy, grounded in the right to bodily integrity, protects “the right not to

have our bodies touched or explored to disclose objects or matters we wish to conceal.”

Territorial privacy protects the home and other spaces where the individual enjoys a

reasonable expectation of privacy. The third category, informational privacy, is the

interest at stake in this appeal. In Tessling, Binnie J. described it, at para. 23:

               Beyond our bodies and the places where we live and work,
               however, lies the thorny question of how much information
               about ourselves and activities we are entitled to shield from
               the curious eyes of the state (R. v. S.A.B., [2003] 2 S.C.R.
               678, 2003 SCC 60). This includes commercial information
               locked in a safe kept in a restaurant owned by the accused (R.
               v. Law, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 227, 2002 SCC 10, at para. 16).
               Informational privacy has been defined as “the claim of
               individuals, groups, or institutions to determine for
               themselves when, how, and to what extent information about
               them is communicated to others”: A. F. Westin, Privacy and
               Freedom (1970), at p. 7. Its protection is predicated on the
               assumption that all information about a person is in a
               fundamental way his own, for him to communicate or retain .
               . . as he sees fit.
               (Report of a Task Force established jointly by Department of
               Communications/Department of Justice, Privacy and
               Computers (1972), at p. 13).

[42]   This characterization would certainly include Jones‟ claim to privacy in her

banking records.
                                         Page: 17



[43]   In Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130, Cory J.

observed, at para. 121, that the right to privacy has been accorded constitutional

protection and should be considered as a Charter value in the development of the

common law tort of defamation. In Hill, Cory J. stated, at para. 121: “reputation is

intimately related to the right to privacy which has been accorded constitutional

protection.” See also R. v. O’Connor, [1995] 4 S.C.R. 411 at para. 113, per

L‟Heureux-Dubé J.: identifying privacy as “an essential component of what it means to

be „free‟.”

[44]   The Charter treatment of privacy accords with art. 12 of the Universal

Declaration of Human Rights, G.A. Res. 271(III), UNGAOR, 3d Sess., Supp. No. 13,

UN. Doc. A/810 (1948) 71, which provides that “[n]o one shall be subjected to arbitrary

interference with his privacy, home or correspondence” and proclaims that “[e]veryone

has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks”. Privacy is

also recognized as a fundamental human right by art. 17 of the International Covenant on

Civil and Political Rights, 19 December 1966, 999 U.N.T.S. 171.

[45]   While the Charter does not apply to common law disputes between private

individuals, the Supreme Court has acted on several occasions to develop the common

law in a manner consistent with Charter values: see R.W.D.S.U. v. Dolphin Delivery Ltd.,

[1986] 2.S.C.R. 573 at 603; R. v. Salituro, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 654, at pp. 666 and 675; Hill

v. Scientology at p. 1169; R.W.D.S.U., Local 558 v. Pepsi-Cola Canada Beverages (West)
                                        Page: 18



Ltd., 2002 SCC 8, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 156; Grant v. Torstar Corp., 2009 SCC 61, [2009] 3

S.C.R. 640.

[46]   The explicit recognition of a right to privacy as underlying specific Charter rights

and freedoms, and the principle that the common law should be developed in a manner

consistent with Charter values, supports the recognition of a civil action for damages for

intrusion upon the plaintiff‟s seclusion: see John D.R. Craig, “Invasion of Privacy and

Charter Values: The Common Law Tort Awakens” (1997), 42 McGill L.J. 355.

d) Legislation

       i) Acts relating to Private Information
[47]   The federal and Ontario governments have enacted a complex legislative

framework addressing the issue of privacy. These include: Personal Information

Protection and Electronic Documents Act, 2000, S.C. 2000, c. 5 (“PIPEDA”); Personal

Health Information Protection Act, 2004, S.O. 2004, c. 3; Freedom of Information and

Protection of Privacy Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. F.31; Municipal Freedom of Information and

Protection of Privacy Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M.56; Consumer Reporting Act, R.S.O. 1990,

c. C.33

[48]   Tsige argues that it is not open to this court to adapt the common law to deal with

the invasion of privacy on the ground that privacy is already the subject of legislation in

Ontario and Canada that reflects carefully considered economic and policy choices. It is

submitted that expanding the reach of the common law in this area would interfere with
                                         Page: 19



these carefully crafted regimes and that any expansion of the law relating to the

protection of privacy should be left to Parliament and the legislature.

[49]   I am not persuaded that the existing legislation provides a sound basis for this

court to refuse to recognize the emerging tort of intrusion upon seclusion and deny Jones

a remedy. In my view, it would take a strained interpretation to infer from these statutes a

legislative intent to supplant or halt the development of the common law in this area: see

Robyn Bell, “Tort of Invasion of Privacy – Has its Time Finally Come?” in Archibald

and Cochrane (eds.), Annual Review of Civil Litigation (Toronto: Thompson Carswell,

2005) at p. 225.

[50]   PIPEDA is federal legislation dealing with “organizations” subject to federal

jurisdiction and does not speak to the existence of a civil cause of action in the province.

While BMO is subject to PIPEDA, there are at least three reasons why, in my view, Jones

should not be restricted to the remedy of a PIPEDA complaint against BMO. First, Jones

would be forced to lodge a complaint against her own employer rather than against Tsige,

the wrongdoer. Second, Tsige acted as a rogue employee contrary to BMO‟s policy and

that may provide BMO with a complete answer to the complaint. Third, the remedies

available under PIPEDA do not include damages and it is difficult to see what Jones

would gain from such a complaint.

[51]   The Ontario legislation essentially deals with freedom of information and the

protection of certain private information with respect to government and other public
                                        Page: 20



institutions. Like PIPEDA, it has nothing to do with private rights of action between

individuals.

       ii) Provincial Privacy Acts
[52]   Four common law provinces currently have a statutorily created tort of invasion of

privacy: British Columbia, Privacy Act, R.S.B.C. 1996 c. 373; Manitoba, Privacy Act,

R.S.M. 1987 c.P125; Saskatchewan, Privacy Act, R.S.S. 1978, c. P-24; and

Newfoundland, Privacy Act, R.S.N. 1990, c.P-22. All four Privacy Acts are similar. They

establish a limited right of action, whereby liability will only be found if the defendant

acts wilfully (not a requirement in Manitoba) and without a claim of right. Moreover, the

nature and degree of the plaintiff‟s privacy entitlement is circumscribed by what is

“reasonable in the circumstances”.

[53]   Under Quebec law, the right to privacy is explicitly protected both by arts. 3 and

35-37 of the Civil Code of Quebec and by s. 5 of the Charter of Human Rights and

Freedoms, R.S.Q. c. C-12. See Robbins v. Canadian Broadcasting Corp. (1957), 12

D.L.R. (2d) 37 (Que. S.C.); Aubry v. Éditions Vice-Versa, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 591; H.

Patrick Glenn “The Right to Privacy in Quebec Law” in Aspects Privacy Law: Essays in

Honour of John M. Sharp, Dale Gibson ed. (Toronto: Butterworths, 1980) at ch. 3.

[54]   Significantly, however, no provincial legislation provides a precise definition of

what constitutes an invasion of privacy. The courts in provinces with a statutory tort are

left with more or less the same task as courts in provinces without such statutes. The

nature of these acts does not indicate that we are faced with a situation where sensitive
                                         Page: 21



policy choices and decisions are best left to the legislature. To the contrary, existing

provincial legislation indicates that when the legislatures have acted, they have simply

proclaimed a sweeping right to privacy and left it to the courts to define the contours of

that right.

e) Other Jurisdictions
       i) United States
[55]   As already indicated, most American states have recognized a right of action for

invasion of privacy rights as defined by the four categories identified by Prosser and now

adopted by the Restatement.

[56]   Generally speaking, to make out cause of action for intrusion upon seclusion, a

plaintiff must show:

       1. an unauthorized intrusion;

       2. that the intrusion was highly offensive to the reasonable person;

       3. the matter intruded upon was private; and,

       4. the intrusion caused anguish and suffering.


See William Prosser, Law of Torts, 4th ed. (West Publishing Company, 1971) at p. 808-

12.


[57]   The first element indicates that the tort focuses on the act of intrusion, as opposed

to dissemination or publication of information: Roe v. Cheyenne Mt. Conf. Resort, Inc.,

124 F(3d) 1221 at 1236 (10th Cir. 1997). The focus of the court in determining whether
                                        Page: 22



this element is satisfied is on “the type of interest involved and not the place where the

invasion occurs”: Evans v. Detlefsen, 857 F(2d) 330 at 338 (6th Cir. 1988).

[58]   With regard to the second element, factors to be considered in determining

whether a particular action is highly offensive include the degree of intrusion, the

context, conduct and circumstances of the intrusion, the tortfeasor‟s motives and

objectives and the expectations of those whose privacy is invaded: see J.D. Lee & Barry

A. Lindahl, Modern Tort Law: Liability & Litigation, 2d ed., looseleaf (Thomson West,

2002) at § 48:6.

[59]   In determining the third element, the plaintiff must establish that the expectation

of seclusion or solitude was objectively reasonable. The courts have adopted the two-

prong test used in the application of the Fourth Amendment of the United States

Constitution. The first step is demonstrating an actual subjective expectation of privacy,

and the second step asks if that expectation is objectively reasonable: Katz v. United

States, 389 U.S. 347 at 361 (1967).

[60]   The fourth element has received considerably less attention as anguish and

suffering are generally presumed once the first three elements have been established.

       ii) Commonwealth Jurisdictions
[61]   In England, privacy is expressly protected by art. 8 of the Convention for the

Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, 4 November 1950, 213

U.N.T.S. 221 at 223, incorporated by the Human Rights Act 1998 (UK), c. 42:

“Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his
                                         Page: 23



correspondence.” However, the House of Lords held in Wainwright v. Home Office

[2003] UKHL 53, [2003] 4 All E.R. 969 at para. 31, that while privacy may be “a value

which underlies the existence of a rule of law (and may point the direction in which the

law should develop)”, privacy is not “a principle of law in itself” capable of supporting a

private law right if action for damages. Yet the next year, in Campbell v. MGN Ltd.

[2004] UKHL 22, [2004] 2 A.C. 467, the House of Lords granted an injunction to restrain

on grounds of breach of confidence publication of newspaper stories and photographs of

a supermodel leaving a drug addiction treatment facility. Lord Hoffman held, in

Campbell at para. 51, that the tort of breach of confidence had evolved into a form of

privacy protection, described by the court as a tort of misuse of private information:

              [T]he new approach takes a different view of the underlying
              value which the law protects. Instead of the cause of action
              being based upon the duty of good faith applicable to
              confidential personal information and trade secrets alike, it
              focuses upon the protection of human autonomy and dignity –
              the right to control the dissemination of information about
              one‟s private life and the right to the esteem and respect of
              people.

[62]   The reformulated action for breach of confidence has been held to embrace

damages claims to protect privacy interests that would easily fall within the intrusion

upon seclusion category: see Mosely v. News Group Newspapers Ltd. [2008] EWHC

1777 (Q.B.) at para. 7: “[t]he law now affords protection to information in respect of

which there is a reasonable expectation of privacy, even in circumstances where there is

no pre-existing relationship giving rise of itself to an enforceable duty of confidence.”
                                           Page: 24



[63]   In Lenah Game Meats Pty Ltd v. Australian Broadcasting Corp., [2001] H.C.A.

63, 185 ALR 1, the High Court of Australia expressly left the door open to the

recognition of a common law right to privacy despite earlier authority to the contrary.

This was applied in Grosse v. Purvis, [2003] Q.D.C. 151, Aust. Torts Reports 81-706,

where the elements for the tort were found to be:

       1. a willed act by the defendant;

       2. which intrudes upon the privacy or seclusion of the plaintiff;

       3. in a manner which would be considered highly offensive to a reasonable

          person of ordinary sensibilities; and

       4. which causes the plaintiff detriment in the form of mental, psychological or

          emotional harm or distress or which prevents or hinders the plaintiff from

          doing an act which she is lawfully entitled to do.

[64]   In Hosking v. Runting, [2004] NZCA 34, the New Zealand Court of Appeal

recognized a common law tort of breach of privacy that is separate and distinct from the

tort of breach of confidence. Although the court dismissed the claim on the merits, the

majority judgment confirmed the existence of a privacy tort in New Zealand dealing with

wrongful publication of private facts to address publicity that is (at para. 26) “truly

humiliating and distressful or otherwise harmful”. The elements of the tort were

described at para. 109:
                                         Page: 25



               1. the existence of facts in respect of which there is a reasonable

               expectation of privacy; and

               2. the publicity given to those private facts must be considered highly

               offensive to an objective reasonable person.

2. Defining the tort of intrusion upon seclusion

a) Introduction

[65]   In my view, it is appropriate for this court to confirm the existence of a right of

action for intrusion upon seclusion. Recognition of such a cause of action would amount

to an incremental step that is consistent with the role of this court to develop the common

law in a manner consistent with the changing needs of society.

b) Rationale

[66]   The case law, while certainly far from conclusive, supports the existence of such a

cause of action. Privacy has long been recognized as an important underlying and

animating value of various traditional causes of action to protect personal and territorial

privacy. Charter jurisprudence recognizes privacy as a fundamental value in our law and

specifically identifies, as worthy of protection, a right to informational privacy that is

distinct from personal and territorial privacy. The right to informational privacy closely

tracks the same interest that would be protected by a cause of action for intrusion upon

seclusion. Many legal scholars and writers who have considered the issue support

recognition of a right of action for breach of privacy: see e.g. P. Winfield, “Privacy”

(1931), 47 L.Q.R. 23; D. Gibson, “Common Law Protection of Privacy: What to do Until
                                        Page: 26



the Legislators Arrive” in Lewis Klar (ed.), Studies in Canadian Tort Law (Toronto:

Butterworths, 1977) 343; Robyn M. Ryan Bell, “Tort of Invasion of Privacy – Has its

Time Finally Come?” in Todd Archibald & Michael Cochrane, Annual Review of Civil

Litigation (Toronto: Thomson Carswell, 2005) 225; Peter Burns, “The Law and Privacy:

the Canadian Experience” (1976), 54 Can. Bar Rev. 1; John D.R. Craig, “Invasion of

Privacy and Charter Values: The Common Law Tort Awakens” (1997), 52 McGill L.J.

355.

[67]   For over one hundred years, technological change has motivated the legal

protection of the individual‟s right to privacy. In modern times, the pace of technological

change has accelerated exponentially. Legal scholars such as Peter Burns have written of

“the pressing need to preserve „privacy‟ which is being threatened by science and

technology to the point of surrender”: “The Law and Privacy: the Canadian Experience”

at p. 1. See also Alan Westin, Privacy and Freedom (New York: Atheneum, 1967). The

internet and digital technology have brought an enormous change in the way we

communicate and in our capacity to capture, store and retrieve information. As the facts

of this case indicate, routinely kept electronic data bases render our most personal

financial information vulnerable. Sensitive information as to our health is similarly

available, as are records of the books we have borrowed or bought, the movies we have

rented or downloaded, where we have shopped, where we have travelled, and the nature

of our communications by cell phone, e-mail or text message.
                                              Page: 27



[68]   It is within the capacity of the common law to evolve to respond to the problem

posed by the routine collection and aggregation of highly personal information that is

readily accessible in electronic form. Technological change poses a novel threat to a right

of privacy that has been protected for hundreds of years by the common law under

various guises and that, since 1982 and the Charter, has been recognized as a right that is

integral to our social and political order.

[69]   Finally, and most importantly, we are presented in this case with facts that cry out

for a remedy. While Tsige is apologetic and contrite, her actions were deliberate,

prolonged and shocking. Any person in Jones‟ position would be profoundly disturbed by

the significant intrusion into her highly personal information. The discipline administered

by Tsige‟s employer was governed by the principles of employment law and the interests

of the employer and did not respond directly to the wrong that had been done to Jones. In

my view, the law of this province would be sadly deficient if we were required to send

Jones away without a legal remedy.

c) Elements
[70]   I would essentially adopt as the elements of the action for intrusion upon seclusion

the Restatement (Second) of Torts (2010) formulation which, for the sake of convenience,

I repeat here:

                 One who intentionally intrudes, physically or otherwise, upon
                 the seclusion of another or his private affairs or concerns, is
                 subject to liability to the other for invasion of his privacy, if
                 the invasion would be highly offensive to a reasonable
                 person.
                                         Page: 28



[71]   The key features of this cause of action are, first, that the defendant‟s conduct

must be intentional, within which I would include reckless; second that the defendant

must have invaded, without lawful justification, the plaintiff‟s private affairs or concerns;

and third, that a reasonable person would regard the invasion as highly offensive causing

distress, humiliation or anguish. However, proof of harm to a recognized economic

interest is not an element of the cause of action. I return below to the question of

damages, but state here that I believe it important to emphasize that given the intangible

nature of the interest protected, damages for intrusion upon seclusion will ordinarily be

measured by a modest conventional sum.

d) Limitations
[72]   These elements make it clear that recognizing this cause of action will not open

the floodgates. A claim for intrusion upon seclusion will arise only for deliberate and

significant invasions of personal privacy. Claims from individuals who are sensitive or

unusually concerned about their privacy are excluded: it is only intrusions into matters

such as one‟s financial or health records, sexual practices and orientation, employment,

diary or private correspondence that, viewed objectively on the reasonable person

standard, can be described as highly offensive.

[73]   Finally, claims for the protection of privacy may give rise to competing claims.

Foremost are claims for the protection of freedom of expression and freedom of the press.

As we are not confronted with such a competing claim here, I need not consider the issue

in detail. Suffice it to say, no right to privacy can be absolute and many claims for the
                                         Page: 29



protection of privacy will have to be reconciled with, and even yield to, such competing

claims. A useful analogy may be found in the Supreme Court of Canada‟s elaboration of

the common law of defamation in Grant v. Torstar where the court held, at para. 65, that

“[w]hen proper weight is given to the constitutional value of free expression on matters

of public interest, the balance tips in favour of broadening the defences available to those

who communicate facts it is in the public‟s interest to know.”

3. Damages

a) Introduction
[74]   As I have indicated, proof of actual loss is not an element of the cause of action for

intrusion upon seclusion. However, the question necessarily arises: what is the

appropriate approach to damages in cases, like the present, where the plaintiff has

suffered no pecuniary loss?

[75]   Where the plaintiff has suffered no provable pecuniary loss, the damages fall into

the category of what Professor Stephen M. Waddams, The Law of Damages, looseleaf ed.

(Toronto: Canada Law Book, 2011) at para. 10.50 describes as “symbolic” and others

have labeled as “moral” damages: see Dulude v. Canada (2000), 192 D.L.R. (4th) 714 at

para. 30 (Fed. C.A.). They are awarded “to vindicate rights or symbolize recognition of

their infringement”: Waddams, at para. 10.50. I agree with Prof. Waddams‟ observation

that a conventional range of damages is necessary to maintain “consistency, predictability

and fairness between one plaintiff and another.”
                                         Page: 30



[76]   Guidance in determining an appropriate range of damages can be gleaned from

existing case law from Ontario as well as from the provinces where there is a statutory

cause of action.

b) Damages under Ontario case law
[77]   Although the tort of intrusion upon exclusion has not been fully recognized in

Ontario law, several cases award damages for invasion of privacy in conjunction with, or

under the head of, a traditional tort such as nuisance or trespass. These claims typically

involve intangible harm such as hurt feelings, embarrassment or mental distress, rather

than damages for pecuniary losses. I attach, as Appendix A, a summary of these cases

and the damages awarded and will briefly discuss the facts of some of those cases here.

[78]   In Saccone v. Orr, the court found that the proven damages were minimal; the

plaintiff had not lost his job or suffered any material loss. However, acknowledging that

the plaintiff‟s privacy was invaded and that he was embarrassed and felt that his

confidence had been betrayed, the court awarded damages in the amount of $500.

Similarly, in Provincial Partitions Inc. v. Ashcor Inplant Structures Ltd. (1993), 50

C.P.R. (3d) 497, (Ont. Gen. Div.), the judge found that the defendant committed the tort

of nuisance by invasion of privacy through abuse of telephone communications when

they called the plaintiff, a competitor company, dozens of times. The judge awarded only

$500 against each defendant and because the defendants had already ceased placing the

phone calls, the judge declined to provide injunctive relief.
                                        Page: 31



[79]   In Roth v. Roth, the plaintiff claimed $100,000 in damages for intimidation,

harassment and invasion of privacy, in addition to approximately $400,000 in additional

damages for other tortious acts. The judge found that because the various causes of action

overlapped, damages were best addressed as a lump sum and that the plaintiff was

entitled to aggravated damages. Despite the lack of evidence of actual physical or

psychological harm, the plaintiff was awarded the sum of $20,000.

[80]   MacKay v. Buelow (1995), 24 C.C.L.T. (2d) 184 (Ont. Gen. Div.) involved a

family law dispute in which the defendant had harassed his ex-wife over a period of four

months. He continuously called her, stalked her on several occasions, threatened to kill

her, and threatened to kidnap their child and take her to another country. The trial judge

found that the plaintiff was entitled to a remedy for the “calculated, devilishly creative

and entirely reprehensible conduct by the defendant” and awarded $25,000 general

damages, $15,000 aggravated damages, $15,000 punitive damages, together with special

damages and a significant award for the future medical care she would require.




c) Damages under provincial legislation

[81]   The four provincial privacy acts do not require proof of damage as an element of

the cause of action. The Manitoba Privacy Act, however, is the only statute that provides

specific guidance with regard to the determination of damages:

             Considerations in awarding damages
                                         Page: 32



              4(2) In awarding damages in an action for a violation of
              privacy of a person, the court shall have regard to all the
              circumstances of the case including

                     (a) the nature, incidence and occasion of the act,
                     conduct or publication constituting the violation
                     of privacy of that person;
                     (b) the effect of the violation of privacy on the
                     health, welfare, social, business or financial
                     position of that person or his family;
                     (c) any relationship, whether domestic or
                     otherwise, between the parties to the action;
                     (d) any distress, annoyance or embarrassment
                     suffered by that person or his family arising
                     from the violation of privacy; and
                     (e) the conduct of that person and the defendant,
                     both before and after the commission of the
                     violation of privacy, including any apology or
                     offer of amends made by the defendant.

[82]   The other provincial statutes leave this determination to judicial discretion. The

case law, however, demonstrates that courts frequently consider the same factors

enumerated in the Manitoba Act. Appendix B contains a summary of these cases, mostly

from British Columbia.

[83]   Absent proof of actual pecuniary loss, the awards are, for the most part, modest.

For example, in Heckert v. 5470 Investments Ltd., 2008 BCSC 1298, 299 D.L.R. (4th)

689, the judge noted that the only evidence regarding damages were “Ms. Heckert‟s

general statements that she felt stressed and needed to see her chiropractor and

acupuncturist for additional visits.” The judge still found that Ms. Heckert‟s landlord had

invaded her privacy by installing close imaging cameras in the hallway outside of her
                                         Page: 33



door, but that the lack of medical evidence meant that the award could be not more than

nominal damages of $3,500.

[84]   Egregious conduct, however, has attracted awards of aggravated damages. In

Watts v. Klaemt, 2007 BCSC 662, 71 B.C.L.R. (4th) 362, the plaintiff was terminated

from her job when her next door neighbour, the defendant, recorded her phone calls and

after discovering she was perpetrating fraud against her company, reported this to her

employer. The plaintiff claimed general damages for emotional pain and suffering, loss of

enjoyment of life and diminution of her reputation as well as punitive or exemplary

damages for the invasion of privacy. In assessing the quantum of damages, the judge

considered the degree to which the plaintiff‟s life was destroyed following the invasion of

privacy - notably the termination of her employment, the need to seek psychological care

for depression and post traumatic stress disorder – and weighed this against the plaintiff‟s

own misconduct. The judge awarded $30,000 including aggravated damages for the

“substantial degree of suffering experienced by the plaintiff”.

[85]   The benchmark case for exemplary or punitive damages for an invasion of privacy

under the British Columbia regime is Malcolm v. Fleming, [2000] CarswellBC 1316,

(B.C.S.C.). The defendant, the plaintiff‟s landlord, installed a video camera in the

plaintiff‟s apartment and recorded her in various stages of undress in her bathroom and

bedroom. The judge awarded punitive damages of $35,000 in addition to $15,000 in

general damages. In determining the figure for punitive damages the judge considered

such factors as the intimate location of the invasion, the relationship between the parties
                                         Page: 34



as landlord and tenant as having a high expectation of privacy, the substantial

premeditation and planning, the additional humiliation of discovery prior to trial, the fact

that a permanent record of the violation existed creating the potential for future

embarrassment and the fact that there was no other means of punishment as there was no

criminal act perpetrated.

[86]   Other cases have awarded punitive damages in consideration of society‟s

abhorrence of the defendant‟s actions, a lack of remorse on the part of the defendant and

the desire to promote specific deterrence: see Watts v. Klaemt; Lee v. Jacobson; Weber v.

Jacobson (1992), 87 D.L.R. (4th) 401 (B.C. S.C.), rev‟d (1994), D.L.R. (4th) 155

(B.C.C.A). In Hollinsworth v. BCTV (1996), 34 C.C.L.T. (2d) 95 (B.C. S.C.), aff‟d 1998

B.C.C.A. 304, for example, the court assessed the plaintiff‟s damages for both breach of

confidentiality and for the invasion of privacy at $15,000. The court there noted at para.

27 that these damages were higher than usual for breaches of the Privacy Act in

consideration of the “reprehensible conduct” of the defendant. In Hollinsworth the

defendant lied to a reporter saying that he had consent to use a videotape of the plaintiff

undergoing surgery to treat baldness. The video was then aired during a news broadcast.

d) Determining the quantum of damages
[87]   In my view, damages for intrusion upon seclusion in cases where the plaintiff has

suffered no pecuniary loss should be modest but sufficient to mark the wrong that has

been done. I would fix the range at up to $20,000. The factors identified in the Manitoba

Privacy Act, which, for convenience, I summarize again here, have also emerged from
                                          Page: 35



the decided cases and provide a useful guide to assist in determining where in the range

the case falls:

       1. the nature, incidence and occasion of the defendant‟s wrongful act;

       2. the effect of the wrong on the plaintiff‟s health, welfare, social, business or

           financial position;

       3. any relationship, whether domestic or otherwise, between the parties;

       4. any distress, annoyance or embarrassment suffered by the plaintiff arising from

           the wrong; and

       5. the conduct of the parties, both before and after the wrong, including any

           apology or offer of amends made by the defendant.

[88]   I would neither exclude nor encourage awards of aggravated and punitive

damages. I would not exclude such awards as there are bound to be exceptional cases

calling for exceptional remedies. However, I would not encourage such awards as, in my

view, predictability and consistency are paramount values in an area where symbolic or

moral damages are awarded and absent truly exceptional circumstances, plaintiffs should

be held to the range I have identified.

3. Application to this case

[89]   It is my view that in this case, Tsige committed the tort of intrusion upon seclusion

when she repeatedly examined the private bank records of Jones. These acts satisfy the

elements laid out above: the intrusion was intentional, it amounted to an unlawful
                                        Page: 36



invasion of Jones‟ private affairs, it would be viewed as highly offensive to the

reasonable person and caused distress, humiliation or anguish.

[90]   In determining damages, there are a number of factors to consider. Favouring a

higher award is the fact that Tsige‟s actions were deliberate and repeated and arose from

a complex web of domestic arrangements likely to provoke strong feelings and

animosity. Jones was understandably very upset by the intrusion into her private financial

affairs. On the other hand, Jones suffered no public embarrassment or harm to her health,

welfare, social, business or financial position and Tsige has apologized for her conduct

and made genuine attempts to make amends. On balance, I would place this case at the

mid-point of the range I have identified and award damages in the amount of $10,000.

Tsige‟s intrusion upon Jones‟ seclusion, this case does not, in my view, exhibit any

exceptional quality calling for an award of aggravated or punitive damages.




Issue 2. Did the motion judge err with respect to costs?
[91]   As I would set aside the judgment in favour of Tsige and grant judgment in favour

of Jones, it is not necessary for me to consider Jones‟ contention that the motion judge

erred in his costs award.
                                        Page: 37



DISPOSITION

[92]   Accordingly, I would allow the appeal, set aside the summary judgment

dismissing the action and in its place substitute an order granting summary judgment in

Jones‟ favour for damages in the amount of $10,000.

[93]   Both parties have filed bills of costs asking for significant awards. In my view, it

is appropriate to take into account the novel issue raised by this case which has clearly

broken new ground. There is discretion to depart from the usual order in cases of novelty.

In my view, in the unusual circumstances of this case, the parties should bear their own

costs throughout and I would make no order as to costs.

                                                                      “Robert J. Sharpe J.A.”
                                                              “I agree W.K. Winkler C.J.O.”
                                                          “I agree J.D. Cunningham A.C.J.”
RELEASED: January 18, 2012
Appendix A: Ontario damage awards

                    Facts                     Details                  Remedy
Saccone v. Orr      Played tape of private    Cause of action:         $500 – General
(1981), 34 O.R.     telephone                 Invasion of privacy      Damages
(2d) 317, (Ont. Co. conversation aloud at
Ct.)                municipal council         Held: Defendant did
                    meeting without           not act with malice
                    counsel.                  and proven damages
                                              were minimal.
Provincial           Persistent crank calls   Cause of action:         $1000 – General
Partitions Inc. v.   to rival business.       Nuisance by invasion     Damages
Ashcor Inplant                                of privacy.
Structures Ltd.
(1993), 50 C.P.R.
(3d) 497, (Ont.
Gen. Div.)
Palad v.             Harassment of           Cause of action:          $2,500 – General
Pantaleon,           borrower in an          Invasion of privacy       Damages
[1989] O.J. No.      attempt to collect on a
985, (Ont. Dist.     debt.
Ct.)
Lipiec v. Borsa      Surveillance of    Causes of action:              $3,000 – General
(1996), 31           backyard.          Trespass and                   Damages
C.C.L.T. (2d) 294,                      nuisance by
(Ont. Gen. Div.)                        deliberate invasion of
                                        privacy
S. & A. Nagy Farm Malicious attempt to  Causes of action:              $4,000 – General
v. Repsys, [1987] persuade borrowers to Defamation and                 Damages
O.J. No. 1987,    amend mortgage        invasion of privacy.           (Husband and
(Ont. Dist. Ct.)  agreement by                                         Wife)
                  embarrassing and
                  harassing them.

Roth v. Roth         Interference with        Causes of action:        $20,000 – General
(1991) 9 C.C.L.T.    access to cottage and    Harassment, statutory    Damages
(2d) 141, (Ont.      with enjoyment of        breach, trespass and     $5,000 –
Gen. Div.)           property.                invasion of privacy`     Exemplary
                                                                       Damages
Garrett v.        Man harassed                Causes of action:        $25,000 – General
Mikalachki [2000] neighbour, reducing         Defamation,              Damages
O.J. No. 1326,    neighbour‟s                 intentional infliction
                                       Page: 2



(Ont. S.C.)        enjoyment of              of emotional distress,
                   property, and spread      nuisance, invasion of
                   rumours about the         privacy, harassment.
                   neighbour‟s alleged
                   criminal past.
Tran v. Financial  Repeated abusive          Causes of action:        $25,000 – General
Debt Recovery Ltd. calls to debtor and his   Defamation,              Damages
(2000), 193 D.L.R. work colleagues           intentional
(4th) 168 (Ont.    regarding repayment.      interference with
S.C.)                                        economic interests,
                                             intentional infliction
                                             of emotional harm,
                                             invasion of privacy
MacKay v. Buelow    Stalked former           Causes of action:        $25,000 – General
(1995), 24          spouse.                  invasion of privacy,     Damages
C.C.L.T. (2d) 184                            trespass to person and   $15,000 –
(Ont. Gen. Div.)                             intentional infliction   Aggravated
                                             of mental suffering      Damages
                                             and emotional            $15,000 –
                                             distress                 Punitive Damages
                                                                      $6,248 – Special
                                             Held: Defendant‟s        Damages
                                             actions were             $44,000 – Costs
                                             “calculated,             of future care
                                             devilishly creative
                                             and entirely
                                             reprehensible”.
                                        Page: 3



Appendix B: Damage awards under provincial privacy legislation

                     Facts                                       Remedy
Pateman et. al. v.   Woman harassed ex-boyfriend and his         Interlocutory injunction
Ross (1988), 68      new wife with threatening phone calls,
Mr. R. (2d) 181      letters and visits.
(Man. Q.B.)
Insurance Corp of    Insurance company investigator asked        $1,000 – General
British Columbia     invasive questions about car driver after   Damages
v. Somosh (1983),    accident, although the insurance
51 B.C.L.R. 344      company had no claim at law against         $1,000 – Punitive
(B.C.S.C.)           driver                                      Damages
Wasserman v.         Claim for breach of privacy and             $3,500 – General
Hall, 2009 BCSC      nuisance; breach was described as           Damages
1318, 87 R.P.R.      “relatively minor”.
(4th) 184
Heckert v. 5470      Landlord placed a video camera in the       $3,500 – Nominal
Investments Ltd.     hallway of the building. Held that there    Damages
2008 BCSC 1298,      was no legitimate reason for close-up
299 D.L.R. (4th)     imaging people immediately outside
689.                 their apartment doors.
Hollinsworth v.      Defendant released videotape of plaintiff   $15,000 – General
BCTV (1996), 34      having hair transplant surgery and media    Damages
C.C.L.T. (2d) 95     aired video.
(B.C.S.C.), aff‟d
1998 B.C.C.A.
304.
F. (J.M.) v.         Defendant published the name of             $3,000 – General
Chappell, (1998)     complainant in sexual assault case in       Damages
45 B.C.L.R. (3d)     breach of publication ban. Jury awarded
64 (B.C.C.A.),       $19,000 in damages, but the judge           $15,000 – Punitive
leave to appeal to   countenanced a defence of publication       Damages
SCC refused,         privilege and reduced this to $1,000.
(1998), 231 N.R.                                                 $1,000 Non-pecuniary
400.                 Court of Appeal reinstated the jury         Damages
                     award.
Lee v. Jacobson;     Landlord drilled a secret hold to spy on    $2,000 – General
Weber v. Jacobson    tenant.                                     Damages
(1992), 87 D.L.R.
(4th) 401 (B.C.      Note: Findings of fact were overturned.     $22,500 – Punitive
S.C.), rev‟d                                                     Damages
                                          Page: 4



(1994), D.L.R.
(4th) 155
(B.C.C.A).
Watts v. Klaemt       Defendant recorded the plaintiff‟s           $30,000 – Actual
2007 BCSC 662,        telephone conversations and the reported     damages
71 B.C.L.R. (4th)     the content to the plaintiff‟s employer.
362.                  Plaintiff was then fired.                    $5,000 – Punitive
                                                                   Damages
Malcolm v.            Defendant landlord secretly videotaped       $15,000 – General
Fleming, [2000]       plaintiff while she was in her bathroom      Damages
CarswellBC 1316,      and bedroom.
(B.C.S.C.)                                                         $35,000 – Punitive
                                                                   Damages
Nesbitt v. Neufeld,   Family dispute: defendant published          $40,000 – General
2010 BCSC 1605,       private documents, started websites,         Damages
[2011] B.C.W.L.D.     Facebook groups, sent letters to friends /
407.                  colleagues / professional associations
                      accusing her of drug abuse, suicide
                      attempts, mental illness and sexual
                      promiscuity.
