English column of docs/sources/kerr-v-baranow-2011-SCC-10.pdf (pdftotext -layout), derived mechanically (each line cut at the first run of 3+ spaces; lines starting in the right column dropped). The bilingual PDF is the source; this copy exists so quotes can be checked against English text alone.

[2011] 1 R.C.S.


Margaret Patricia Kerr

v.

Nelson Dennis Baranow

- and -




Michele Vanasse

v.

David Seguin

Indexed as: Kerr v. Baranow
2011 SCC 10
File Nos.: 33157, 33358.
2010: April 21; 2011: February 18.
Present: McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Abella,
Charron, Rothstein and Cromwell JJ.

ON APPEAL FROM THE COURTS OF APPEAL FOR
BRITISH COLUMBIA AND ONTARIO
Family law — Common law spouses — Property —
Unjust enrichment — Monetary remedy — Whether
monetary remedy restricted to quantum meruit award —
Whether evidence of joint family venture should be con-
sidered in conferring remedy — Whether mutual benefit
conferral and reasonable expectations of parties should
be considered in assessing award.
Family law — Common law spouses — Property —
Resulting trust — Whether evidence of common intention
should be considered in context of resulting trust —
Whether resulting trust principles apply to property or
monetary award in resolution of domestic cases.
Family law — Common law spouses — Support —
Parties separating after living together for more than
25 years — Female partner commencing proceedings
for a share of property and support — Whether support
should be payable from date of trial or date on which
proceedings commenced.
In the Kerr appeal, K and B, a couple in their late
60s separated after a common law relationship of more
270


than 25 years. They both had worked through much of
that time and each had contributed in various ways to
their mutual welfare. K claimed support and a share of
property in B’s name based on resulting trust and unjust
enrichment principles. B counterclaimed that K had
been unjustly enriched by his housekeeping and per-
sonal assistance services provided after K suffered a
debilitating stroke. The trial judge awarded K $315,000,




a third of the value of the home in B’s name that they
had shared, both by way of resulting trust and unjust
enrichment, based on his conclusion that K had pro-
vided $60,000 worth of equity and assets at the begin-
ning of their relationship. He also awarded K $1,739 per
month in spousal support effective the date she com-
menced proceedings. The Court of Appeal concluded
that K did not make a financial contribution to the
acquisition or improvement of B’s property that was the
basis for her award at trial, and dismissed her property
claims. A new trial was ordered for B’s counterclaim.
The Court of Appeal further held that the commence-
ment date of the spousal support should be the date of
trial.

In the Vanasse appeal, it was agreed that S was
unjustly enriched by the contributions of his partner,
V, during their 12-year common law relationship. For
the first four years of cohabitation, both parties pur-
sued their respective careers. In 1997, V took a leave
of absence from her employment and the couple moved
to Halifax so that S could pursue a business opportu-
nity. Over the next three and a half years, their chil-
dren were born and V stayed at home to care for them
and performed the domestic labour. S worked long
hours and travelled extensively for business. In 1998,
S stepped down as CEO of the business and the family
returned to Ottawa where they bought a home in joint
names. In 2000, S received approximately $11 mil-
lion for his shares in the business and from that time,
until their separation in 2005, he participated more
with the domestic chores. The trial judge found no
unjust enrichment for the first and last periods of their
cohabitation, but held that S had been unjustly enriched
at V’s expense during the period in which the chil-
dren were born. V was entitled to half of the value of
the wealth S accumulated during the period of unjust
enrichment, less her interest in the home and RRSPs
in her name. The court of appeal set aside this award
and directed that the proper approach to valuation was
a quantum meruit calculation in which the value each
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


party received from the other was assessed and set
off.

Held: In Kerr, the appeal on the spousal support
issue should be allowed and the order of the trial judge
should be restored. The appeal from the order dismiss-




ing K’s unjust enrichment claim should also be allowed
and a new trial ordered. The appeal from the order dis-
missing K’s claim in resulting trust should be dismissed.
The order for a new hearing of B’s counterclaim should
be affirmed.

Held: In Vanasse, the appeal should be allowed and
the order of the trial judge restored.

These appeals require the resolution of five main
issues. The first concerns the role of the “common
intention” resulting trust in claims by domestic part-
ners. The second issue is whether the monetary remedy
for a successful unjust enrichment claim must always
be assessed on a quantum meruit basis. The third area
relates to mutual benefit conferral in the context of an
unjust enrichment claim and when this should be taken
into account. The fourth concerns the role the parties’
reasonable expectations play in the unjust enrichment
analysis. Finally, in the Kerr appeal, this Court must
also decide the effective date of the commencement of
spousal support.

For unmarried persons in domestic relationships in
most common law provinces, judge-made law is the
only option for addressing the property consequences
of the breakdown of those relationships. The main legal
mechanisms available have been the resulting trust
and the action in unjust enrichment. Resulting trusts
arise from gratuitous transfers in two types of situa-
tions: the transfer of property from one partner to the
other without consideration, and the joint contribution
by two partners to the acquisition of property, title to
which is in the name of only one of them. The underly-
ing legal principle is that contributions to the acquisi-
tion of a property, which were not reflected in the legal
title, might nonetheless give rise to a property inter-
est. In Canada, added to this underlying notion was
the idea that a resulting trust could arise based solely
on the “common intention” of the parties that the non-
owner partner was intended to have an interest. This
theory is doctrinally unsound, however, and should
272


have no continuing role in the resolution of domes-
tic property disputes. While traditional resulting trust
principles may well have a role to play in the resolu-
tion of property disputes between unmarried domestic
partners, parties have increasingly turned to the law of
unjust enrichment and the remedial constructive trust.
Since the decision in Pettkus v. Becker, the law of unjust
enrichment has provided a much less artificial, more




comprehensive and more principled basis to address
claims for the distribution of assets on the breakdown
of domestic relationships. It permits recovery whenever
the plaintiff can establish three elements: an enrich-
ment of the defendant by the plaintiff, a corresponding
deprivation of the plaintiff, and the absence of a juris-
tic reason for the enrichment. This Court has taken a
straightforward economic approach to the elements of
enrichment and corresponding deprivation. The plain-
tiff must show that he or she has given a tangible ben-
efit to the defendant that the defendant received and
retained. Further, the enrichment must correspond to a
deprivation that the plaintiff has suffered. Importantly,
provision of domestic services may support a claim for
unjust enrichment. The absence of a juristic reason for
the enrichment means that there is no reason in law or
justice for the defendant’s retention of the benefit con-
ferred by the plaintiff. This third element also provides
for due consideration of the autonomy of the parties,
their legitimate expectations and the right to order their
affairs by contract.
There are two steps to the juristic reason analysis.
First, the established categories of juristic reason must
be considered, which could include benefits conferred
by way of gift or pursuant to a legal obligation. In their
absence, the second step permits consideration of the
reasonable expectations of the parties and public policy
considerations to assess whether particular enrichments
are unjust.
The object of the remedy for unjust enrichment is to
require the defendant to reverse the unjustified enrich-
ment and may attract either a “personal restitutionary
award” or a “restitutionary proprietary award”. In most
cases, a monetary award will be sufficient to remedy
the unjust enrichment but two issues raise difficulties
in determining appropriate compensation. Where there
has been a mutual conferral of benefits, it is often dif-
ficult for the court to retroactively value every service
rendered by each party to the other. While the value of
domestic services is not questioned, it would be unjust
to only consider the contributions of one party. A second
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


difficulty is whether a monetary award must invariably
be calculated on a quantum meruit, “value received”
or “fee-for-services” basis or whether that monetary
relief may be assessed more flexibly, on a “value sur-
vived basis” by reference to the overall increase in
the couple’s wealth during the relationship. In some
cases, a proprietary remedy may be required. Where
the plaintiff can demonstrate a link or causal connec-




tion between his or her contributions and the acquisi-
tion, preservation, maintenance or improvement of the
disputed property, and that a monetary award would be
insufficient, a share of the property proportionate to the
claimant’s contribution can be impressed with a con-
structive trust in his or her favour.

Three areas in the law of unjust enrichment require
clarification. Once the choice has been made to award
a monetary remedy, the question is how to quantify it.
If a monetary remedy must invariably be quantified on
a quantum meruit basis, the remedial choice in unjust
enrichment cases becomes whether to impose a con-
structive trust or to order a monetary remedy calculated
on a quantum meruit basis. This dichotomy of reme-
dial choice should be rejected, however, as the value
survived measure is a perfectly plausible alternative to
the constructive trust. Restricting the money remedy to
a fee-for-service calculation is inappropriate for four
reasons. First, it fails to reflect the reality of the lives
of many domestic partners. The basis of all domestic
unjust enrichment claims do not fit into only two cat-
egories — those where the enrichment consists of the
provision of unpaid services, and those where it con-
sists of an unrecognized contribution to the acquisition,
improvement, maintenance or preservation of specific
property. Where the contributions of both parties over
time have resulted in an accumulation of wealth, the
unjust enrichment occurs when one party retains a dis-
proportionate share of the assets that are the product
of their joint efforts following the breakdown of their
relationship. The required link between the contribu-
tions and a specific property may not exist but there
may clearly be a link between the joint efforts of the
parties and the accumulation of wealth. While the law
of unjust enrichment does not mandate a presumption
of equal sharing, nor does the mere fact of cohabita-
tion entitle one party to share in the other’s property,
the legal consequences of the breakdown of a domes-
tic relationship should reflect realistically the way
people live their lives. Second, the remedial dichotomy
is inconsistent with the inherent flexibility of unjust
enrichment and with the Court’s approach to equitable
274


remedies. Moreover, the Court has recognized that,
given the wide variety of circumstances addressed by
the traditional categories of unjust enrichment, as well
as the flexibility of the broader, principled approach, its
development requires recourse to a number of differ-
ent sorts of remedies depending on the circumstances.
There is no reason in principle why one of the tradi-
tional categories of unjust enrichment should be used




to force the monetary remedy for all present domestic
unjust enrichment cases into a remedial strait-jacket.
What is essential is that there must be a link between
the contribution and the accumulation of wealth. Where
that link exists, and a proprietary remedy is either inap-
propriate or unnecessary, the monetary award should
be fashioned to reflect the true nature of the enrichment
and the corresponding deprivation. Third, the reme-
dial dichotomy ignores the historical basis of quantum
meruit claims. Finally, a remedial dichotomy is not
mandated, as has been suggested, by the Court’s judg-
ment in Peter v. Beblow.
Where the unjust enrichment is best characterized
as an unjust retention of a disproportionate share of
assets accumulated during the course of a “joint family
venture” to which both partners have contributed, the
monetary remedy should be calculated according to the
share of the accumulated wealth proportionate to the
claimant’s contributions. Where the spouses are domes-
tic and financial partners, there is no need for “duel-
ling quantum meruits”. The law of unjust enrichment,
including the remedial constructive trust, is the pref-
erable method of responding to the inequities brought
about by the breakdown of a common law relationship,
since the remedies for unjust enrichment “are tailored
to the parties’ specific situation and grievances”. To
be entitled to a monetary remedy on a value-survived
basis, the claimant must show both that there was a joint
family venture and a link between his or her contribu-
tions and the accumulation of wealth.
To determine whether the parties have, in fact,
been engaged in a joint family venture, the particular
circumstances of each particular relationship must be
taken into account. This is a question of fact and must
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


be assessed by having regard to all of the relevant cir-
cumstances, including factors relating to mutual effort,
economic integration, actual intent and priority of the
family. The pooling of effort and team work, the deci-
sion to have and raise children together, and the length
of the relationship may all point towards the extent to
which the parties have formed a true partnership and
jointly worked towards important mutual goals. The use




of parties’ funds entirely for family purposes or where
one spouse takes on all, or a greater proportion, of the
domestic labour, freeing the other spouse from those
responsibilities and enabling him or her to pursue activ-
ities in the paid workforce, may also indicate a pool-
ing of resources. The more extensive the integration of
the couple’s finances, economic interests and economic
well-being, the more likely it is that they have engaged
in a joint family venture. The actual intentions of the
parties, either express or inferred from their conduct,
must be given considerable weight. Their conduct may
show that they intended the domestic and professional
spheres of their lives to be part of a larger, common
venture, but may also conversely negate the existence
of a joint family venture, or support the conclusion
that particular assets were to be held independently.
Another consideration is whether and to what extent the
parties have given priority to the family in their deci-
sion making, and whether there has been detrimental
reliance on the relationship, by one or both of the par-
ties, for the sake of the family. This may occur where
one party leaves the workforce for a period of time to
raise children; relocates for the benefit of the other par-
ty’s career; foregoes career or educational advancement
for the benefit of the family or relationship; or accepts
underemployment in order to balance the financial and
domestic needs of the family unit.

The unjust enrichment analysis in domestic situa-
tions is often complicated by the fact that there has been
a mutual conferral of benefits. When the appropriate
remedy is a money award based on a fee-for-services
provided approach, the fact that the defendant has
also provided services to the claimant should mainly
be considered at the defence and remedy stages of the
analysis but may be considered at the juristic reason
stage to the extent that the provision of reciprocal ben-
efits constitutes relevant evidence of the existence (or
non-existence) of a juristic reason for the enrichment.
However, given that the purpose of the juristic reason
276


step in the analysis is to determine whether the enrich-
ment was just, not its extent, mutual benefit conferral
should only be considered at the juristic reason stage for
that limited purpose. Otherwise, the mutual exchange
of benefits should be taken into account only after the
three elements of an unjust enrichment claim have been
established.




Claimants must show that there is no juristic reason
falling within any of the established categories, such
as whether the benefit was a gift or pursuant to a legal
obligation. It is then open to the defendant to show that
a different juristic reason for the enrichment should be
recognized, having regard to the parties’ reasonable
expectations and public policy considerations. Mutual
benefit conferral and the parties’ reasonable expecta-
tions have a very limited role to play at the first step
of the juristic reason analysis. In some cases, the fact
that mutual benefits were conferred or that the bene-
fits were provided pursuant to the parties’ reasonable
expectations may be relevant evidence of whether one
of the existing categories of juristic reasons is present.
The parties’ reasonable or legitimate expectations have
a role to play at the second step of the juristic reason
analysis, where the defendant bears the burden of estab-
lishing that there is a juristic reason for retaining the
benefit that does not fall within the existing categories.
The question is whether the parties’ mutual expecta-
tions show that retention of the benefits is just.
In the Vanasse appeal, although not labelling it as
such, the trial judge found that there was a joint family
venture and that there was a link between V’s contri-
bution to it and the substantial accumulation of wealth
that the family achieved. She made a reasonable assess-
ment of the monetary award appropriate to reverse this
unjust enrichment, taking due account of S’s substan-
tial contributions. Her findings of fact and analysis indi-
cate that the unjust enrichment of S at the expense of
V ought to be characterized as the retention by S of
a disproportionate share of the wealth generated from
a joint family venture. Several factors suggested that,
throughout their relationship, the parties were work-
ing collaboratively towards common goals. They made
important decisions keeping the overall welfare of
the family at the forefront. It was through their joint
efforts that they were able to raise a young family and
acquire wealth. S could not have made the efforts he did
to build up the company but for V’s assumption of the
domestic responsibilities. Notably, the period of unjust
enrichment corresponds to the time during which the
parties had two children together, a further indicator
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


that they were working together to achieve common
goals. The length of the relationship is also relevant,
and their 12-year cohabitation is a significant period of
time. There was also evidence of economic integration
as their house was registered jointly and they had a joint
bank account. Their words and actions indicated that
there was a joint family venture, to which the couple
jointly contributed for their mutual benefit and the bene-




fit of their children. There is a strong inference from the
factual findings that, to S’s knowledge, V relied on the
relationship to her detriment. She left her career, gave
up her own income, and moved away from her family
and friends. V then stayed home and cared for their two
small children. During the period of the unjust enrich-
ment, V was responsible for a disproportionate share
of the domestic labour. There was a clear link between
V’s contribution and the accumulation of wealth. The
trial judge took a realistic and practical view of the evi-
dence and took into account S’s non-financial contribu-
tions and periods during which V’s contributions were
not disproportionate to S and her judgment should be
restored.

The Court of Appeal was right to set aside the trial
judge’s findings of resulting trust and unjust enrichment
in Kerr and in ordering a new hearing on B’s counter-
claim. On the basis of the unsatisfactory record at trial,
which includes findings of fact tainted by clear error,
K’s unjust enrichment claim should not have been dis-
missed but a new trial ordered. The Court of Appeal
erred in assessing B’s contributions as part of the juris-
tic reason analysis and prematurely truncated K’s prima
facie case of unjust enrichment. The family property
approach is rejected, and for K to show an entitlement to
a proportionate share of the wealth accumulated during
the relationship, she must establish that B has been
unjustly enriched at her expense, that their relationship
constituted a joint family venture, and that her contribu-
tions are linked to the generation of wealth during the
relationship. She would then have to show what propor-
tion of the jointly accumulated wealth reflects her con-
tributions. With regard to B’s counterclaim, there was
evidence that he made very significant contributions to
K’s welfare such that his counterclaim cannot simply
be dismissed. The trial judge also referred to various
other monetary and non-monetary contributions which
K made to the couple’s welfare and comfort, but he did
not evaluate them, let alone compare them with the
278


contributions made by B. There are few findings of fact
relevant to the key question of whether the parties’ rela-
tionship constituted a joint family venture. Further, the
Court of Appeal ought not to have set aside the trial
judge’s order for spousal support in favour of K effec-
tive on the date she had commenced proceedings. It is
clear that K was in need of support from B at the date
she started her proceedings and remained so at the time




of trial. K should not have been faulted for not bringing
an interim application in seeking support for the period
in question. She suffered from a serious physical dis-
ability, and her standard of living was markedly lower
than it was while she lived with B. B had the means to
provide support, had prompt notice of her claim, and
there was no indication in the Court of Appeal’s reasons
that it considered the judge’s award imposed on him a
hardship so as to make that award inappropriate.
Cases Cited
Applied: Peel (Regional Municipality) v. Canada,
[1992] 3 S.C.R. 762; Peter v. Beblow, [1993] 1 S.C.R.
980, rev’g (1990), 50 B.C.L.R. (2d) 266, rev’g [1988]
B.C.J. No. 887 (QL); Sorochan v. Sorochan, [1986] 2
S.C.R. 38; Garland v. Consumers’ Gas Co., 2004 SCC
25, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 629; considered: Pettkus v. Becker,
[1980] 2 S.C.R. 834; Rathwell v. Rathwell, [1978] 2
S.C.R. 436; Pecore v. Pecore, 2007 SCC 17, [2007] 1
S.C.R. 795; D.B.S. v. S.R.G., 2006 SCC 37, [2006] 2
S.C.R. 231; referred to: Dyer v. Dyer (1788), 2 Cox
Eq. Cas. 92, 30 E.R. 42; Murdoch v. Murdoch, [1975]
1 S.C.R. 423; Gissing v. Gissing, [1970] 2 All E.R. 780;
Pettitt v. Pettitt, [1970] A.C. 777; Reference re Goods
and Services Tax, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 445; Mack v. Canada
(Attorney General) (2002), 60 O.R. (3d) 737; Nova
Scotia (Attorney General) v. Walsh, 2002 SCC 83,
[2002] 4 S.C.R. 325; Lac Minerals Ltd. v. International
Corona Resources Ltd., [1989] 2 S.C.R. 574; Bell v.
Bailey (2001), 203 D.L.R. (4th) 589; Wilson v. Fotsch,
2010 BCCA 226, 319 D.L.R. (4th) 26; Pickelein v.
Gillmore (1997), 30 B.C.L.R. (3d) 44; Harrison v.
Kalinocha (1994), 90 B.C.L.R. (2d) 273; MacFarlane v.
Smith, 2003 NBCA 6, 256 N.B.R. (2d) 108; Shannon v.
Gidden, 1999 BCCA 539, 71 B.C.L.R. (3d) 40; Herman
v. Smith (1984), 42 R.F.L. (2d) 154; Clarke v. Clarke,
[1990] 2 S.C.R. 795; Cadbury Schweppes Inc. v. FBI
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


Foods Ltd., [1999] 1 S.C.R. 142; Soulos v. Korkontzilas,
[1997] 2 S.C.R. 217; Pacific National Investments
Ltd. v. Victoria (City), 2004 SCC 75, [2004] 3 S.C.R.
575; Birmingham v. Ferguson, 2004 CanLII 4764;
McDougall v. Gesell Estate, 2001 MBCA 3, 153 Man.
R. (2d) 54; Nasser v. Mayer-Nasser (2000), 5 R.F.L.
(5th) 100; Panara v. Di Ascenzo, 2005 ABCA 47, 361
A.R. 382; Ford v. Werden (1996), 27 B.C.L.R. (3d) 169;




Thomas v. Fenton, 2006 BCCA 299, 269 D.L.R. (4th)
376; Giles v. McEwan (1896), 11 Man. R. 150; Garland
v. Consumers’ Gas Co., [1998] 3 S.C.R. 112; Nance v.
British Columbia Electric Railway Co., [1951] A.C.
601; MacKinnon v. MacKinnon (2005), 75 O.R. (3d)
175; S. (L.) v. P. (E.) (1999), 67 B.C.L.R. (3d) 254.
Statutes and Regulations Cited
Divorce Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp.).
Family Relations Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 128, ss. 1(1)
“spouse”, 93(5)(d).
Authors Cited
Birks, Peter. An Introduction to the Law of Restitution.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985.
Birks, Peter. Unjust Enrichment, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2005.
Davies, J. D. “Duties of Confidence and Loyalty”, [1990]
L.M.C.L.Q. 4.
Fridman, G. H. L. Restitution, 2nd ed. Scarborough,
Ont.: Carswell, 1992.
Gordon, Marie L. “Blame Over: Retroactive Child and
Spousal Support in the Post-Guideline Era” (2004-
2005), 23 C.F.L.Q. 243.
Lord Goff of Chieveley and Gareth Jones. The Law of
Restitution, 7th ed. London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2007.
Maddaugh, Peter D., and John D. McCamus. The Law of
Restitution. Aurora, Ont.: Canada Law Book, 1990.
Maddaugh, Peter D., and John D. McCamus. The Law of
Restitution. Aurora, Ont.: Canada Law Book, 2004
(loose-leaf updated August 2010, release 6).
Matrimonial Property Law in Canada, vol. 1, by James
G. McLeod and Alfred A. Mamo, eds. Toronto: Cars-
well, 1993 (loose-leaf updated 2010, release 8).
McCamus, John D. “Restitution on Dissolution of Marital
and Other Intimate Relationships: Constructive Trust
or Quantum Meruit?”, in Jason W. Neyers, Mitchell
McInnes and Stephen G. A. Pitel, eds., Understand-
ing Unjust Enrichment. Portland: Hart Publishing,
2004, 359.
Mee, John. The Property Rights of Cohabitees: An
Analysis of Equity’s Response in Five Common Law
Jurisdictions. Portland: Hart Publishing, 1999.
280


Oosterhoff on Trusts: Text, Commentary and Materials,
7th ed. by A. H. Oosterhoff et al. Toronto: Carswell,
2009.
Parkinson, Patrick. “Beyond Pettkus v. Becker: Quan-
tifying Relief for Unjust Enrichment” (1993), 43
U.T.L.J. 217.
Pettit, Philip H. Equity and the Law of Trusts, 11th ed.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.




Scane, Ralph E. “Relationships ‘Tantamount to Spousal’,
Unjust Enrichment, and Constructive Trusts” (1991),
70 Can. Bar Rev. 260.
Waters, Donovan. Comment (1975), 53 Can. Bar Rev.
366.
Waters’ Law of Trusts in Canada, 3rd ed. by Donovan
W. M. Waters, Mark R. Gillen and Lionel D. Smith,
eds. Toronto: Thomson, 2005.
Youdan, Timothy G. “Resulting and Constructive
Trusts”, in Special Lectures of the Law Society of
Upper Canada 1993 — Family Law: Roles, Fairness
and Equality. Scarborough, Ont.: Carswell, 1994, 169.

APPEAL from a judgment of the British
Columbia Court of Appeal (Levine, Tysoe and
Smith JJ.A.), 2009 BCCA 111, 93 B.C.L.R. (4th)
201, 266 B.C.A.C. 298, [2009] 9 W.W.R. 285, 66
R.F.L. (6th) 1, [2009] B.C.J. No. 474 (QL), 2009
CarswellBC 642, reversing in part a decision of
Romilly J., 2007 BCSC 1863, 47 R.F.L. (6th) 103,
[2007] B.C.J. No. 2737 (QL), 2007 CarswellBC
3047. Appeal allowed in part.

APPEAL from a judgment of the Ontario Court
of Appeal (Weiler, Juriansz and Epstein JJ.A.),
2009 ONCA 595, 252 O.A.C. 218, 96 O.R. (3d)
321, [2009] O.J. No. 3211 (QL), 2009 CarswellOnt
4407, reversing a decision of Blishen J., 2008
CanLII 35922, [2008] O.J. No. 2832 (QL), 2008
CarswellOnt 4265. Appeal allowed.

Armand A. Petronio and Geoffrey B. Gomery,
for the appellant Margaret Kerr.

Susan G. Label and Marie-France Major, for
the respondent Nelson Baranow.

John E. Johnson, for the appellant Michele
Vanasse.

H. Hunter Phillips, for the respondent David
Seguin.
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


The judgment of the Court was delivered by

Cromwell J. —

I.




[1] In a series of cases spanning 30 years, the
Court has wrestled with the financial and prop-
erty rights of parties on the breakdown of a mar-
riage or domestic relationship. Now, for married
spouses, comprehensive matrimonial property stat-
utes enacted in the late 1970s and 1980s provide
the applicable legal framework. But for unmarried
persons in domestic relationships in most common
law provinces, judge-made law was and remains
the only option. The main legal mechanisms avail-
able to parties and courts have been the resulting
trust and the action in unjust enrichment.

[2] In the early cases of the 1970s, the parties and
the courts turned to the resulting trust. The under-
lying legal principle was that contributions to the
acquisition of a property, which were not reflected
in the legal title, could nonetheless give rise to a
property interest. Added to this underlying notion
was the idea that a resulting trust could arise based
on the “common intention” of the parties that the
non-owner partner was intended to have an inter-
est. The resulting trust soon proved to be an unsat-
isfactory legal solution for many domestic property
disputes, but claims continue to be advanced and
decided on that basis.

[3] As the doctrinal problems and practical limi-
tations of the resulting trust became clearer, parties
and courts turned increasingly to the emerging law
of unjust enrichment. As the law developed, unjust
enrichment carried with it the possibility of a reme-
dial constructive trust. In order to successfully
prove a claim for unjust enrichment, the claimant
must show that the defendant has been enriched,
the claimant suffered a corresponding detriment,
and there is no “juristic reason” for the enrichment.
282


This claim has become the pre-eminent vehicle for
addressing the financial consequences of the break-
down of domestic relationships. However, various
issues continue to create controversy, and these two
appeals, argued consecutively, provide the Court
with the opportunity to address them.




[4] In the Kerr appeal, a couple in their late 60s
separated after a common law relationship of more
than 25 years. Both had worked through much of
that time and each had contributed in various ways
to their mutual welfare. Ms. Kerr claimed support
and a share of property held in her partner’s name
based on resulting trust and unjust enrichment
principles. The trial judge awarded her one-third
of the value of the couple’s residence, grounded in
both resulting trust and unjust enrichment claims
(2007 BCSC 1863, 47 R.F.L. (6th) 103). He did
not address, other than in passing, Mr. Baranow’s
counterclaim that Ms. Kerr had been unjustly
enriched at his expense. The judge also ordered
substantial monthly support for Ms. Kerr pursu-
ant to statute, effective as of the date she applied
to the court for relief. However, the resulting trust
and unjust enrichment conclusions of the trial
judge were set aside by the British Columbia Court
of Appeal (2009 BCCA 111, 93 B.C.L.R. (4th)
201). Both lower courts addressed the role of the
parties’ common intention and reasonable expec-
tations. The appeal to this Court raises the ques-
tions of the role of resulting trust law in these types
of disputes, as well as how an unjust enrichment
analysis should take account of the mutual confer-
ral of benefits and what role the parties’ intentions
and expectations play in that analysis. This Court
is also called upon to decide whether the award of
spousal support should be effective as of the date
of application, as found by the trial judge, the date
the trial began, as ordered by the Court of Appeal,
or some other date.
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


[5] In the Vanasse appeal, the central problem
is how to quantify a monetary award for unjust
enrichment. It is agreed that Mr. Seguin was
unjustly enriched by the contributions of his part-
ner, Ms. Vanasse; the two lived in a common law
relationship for about 12 years and had two children
together during this time. The trial judge valued the




extent of the enrichment by determining what pro-
portion of Mr. Seguin’s increased wealth was due to
Ms. Vanasse’s efforts as an equal contributor to the
family venture (2008 CanLII 35922). The Court of
Appeal set aside this finding and, while ordering a
new trial, directed that the proper approach to valu-
ation was to place a monetary value on the services
provided by Ms. Vanasse to the family, taking due
account of Mr. Seguin’s own contributions by way
of set-off (2009 ONCA 595, 252 O.A.C. 218). In
short, the Court of Appeal held that Ms. Vanasse
should be treated as an unpaid employee, not a co-
venturer. The appeal to this Court challenges this
conclusion.

[6] These appeals require us to resolve five main
issues. The first concerns the role of the “common
intention” resulting trust in claims by domestic
partners. In my view, it is time to recognize that
the “common intention” approach to resulting trust
has no further role to play in the resolution of prop-
erty claims by domestic partners on the breakdown
of their relationship.

[7] The second issue concerns the nature of the
money remedy for a successful unjust enrichment
claim. Some courts take the view that if the claim-
ant’s contribution cannot be linked to specific
property, a money remedy must always be assessed
on a fee-for-services basis. Other courts have taken
a more flexible approach. In my view, where both
parties have worked together for the common good,
with each making extensive, but different, contri-
butions to the welfare of the other and, as a result,
284


have accumulated assets, the money remedy for
unjust enrichment should reflect that reality. The
money remedy in those circumstances should not
be based on a minute totting up of the give and take
of daily domestic life, but rather should treat the
claimant as a co-venturer, not as the hired help.





[8] The third area requiring clarification relates
to mutual benefit conferral. Many domestic rela-
tionships involve the mutual conferral of benefits,
in the sense that each contributes in various ways
to the welfare of the other. The question is how
and at what point in the unjust enrichment analysis
should this mutual conferral of benefits be taken
into account? For reasons I will develop below, this
issue should, with a small exception, be addressed
at the defence and remedy stage.

[9] Fourth, there is the question of what role the
parties’ reasonable or legitimate expectations play
in the unjust enrichment analysis. My view is that
they have a limited role, and must be considered in
relation to whether there is a juristic reason for the
enrichment.

[10] Finally, there is the issue of the appropriate
date for the commencement of spousal support. In
my respectful view, the Court of Appeal erred in
setting aside the trial judge’s selection of the date of
application in the circumstances of the Kerr appeal.

[11] I will first address the law of resulting trusts
as it applies to the breakdown of a marriage-like
relationship. Next, I will turn to the law of unjust
enrichment in this context. Finally, I will address
the specific issues raised in the two appeals.

II. Resulting Trusts

[12] The resulting trust played an important role
in the early years of the Court’s jurisprudence relat-
ing to property rights following the breakdown of
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


intimate personal relationships. This is not surpris-
ing; it had been settled law since at least 1788 in
England (and likely long before) that the trust of a
legal estate, whether in the names of the purchaser
or others, “results” to the person who advances the
purchase money: Dyer v. Dyer (1788), 2 Cox Eq.
Cas. 92, 30 E.R. 42, at p. 43. The resulting trust,




therefore, seemed a promising vehicle to address
claims that one party’s contribution to the acquisi-
tion of property was not reflected in the legal title.

[13] The resulting trust jurisprudence in domes-
tic property cases developed into what has been
called “a purely Canadian invention”, the “common
intention” resulting trust: A. H. Oosterhoff, et al.,
Oosterhoff on Trusts: Text, Commentary and
Materials (7th ed. 2009), at p. 642. While this
vehicle has largely been eclipsed by the law of
unjust enrichment since the decision of the Court
in Pettkus v. Becker, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 834, claims
based on the “common intention” resulting trust
continue to be advanced. In the Kerr appeal, for
example, the trial judge justified the imposition of a
resulting trust, in part, on the basis that the parties
had a common intention that Mr. Baranow would
hold title to the property by way of a resulting trust
for Ms. Kerr. The Court of Appeal, while reversing
the trial judge’s finding of fact on this point, implic-
itly accepted the ongoing vitality of the common
intention resulting trust.

[14] However promising this common intention
resulting trust approach looked at the beginning,
doctrinal and practical problems soon became
apparent and have been the subject of comment
by the Court and scholars: see, e.g., Pettkus, at pp.
842-43; Oosterhoff, at pp. 641-47; D. W. M. Waters,
M. R. Gillen and L. D. Smith, eds., Waters’ Law of
Trusts in Canada (3rd ed. 2005) (“Waters’”), at pp.
430-35; J. Mee, The Property Rights of Cohabitees:
An Analysis of Equity’s Response in Five Common
Law Jurisdictions (1999), at pp. 39-43; T. G.
Youdan, “Resulting and Constructive Trusts”,
in Special Lectures of the Law Society of Upper
286


Canada 1993 — Family Law: Roles, Fairness and
Equality (1994), 169, at pp. 172-74.

[15] In this Court, since Pettkus, the common
intention resulting trust remains intact but unused.
While traditional resulting trust principles may




well have a role to play in the resolution of property
disputes between unmarried domestic partners,
the time has come to acknowledge that there is no
continuing role for the common intention resulting
trust. To explain why, I must first put the question
in the context of some basic principles about result-
ing trusts.

[16] That task is not as easy as it should be; there
is not much one can say about resulting trusts with-
out a well-grounded fear of contradiction. There is
debate about how they should be classified and how
they arise, let alone about many of the finer points:
see, e.g., Rathwell v. Rathwell, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 436,
at pp. 449-50; Waters’, at pp. 19-22; P. H. Pettit,
Equity and the Law of Trusts (11th ed. 2009), at p.
67. However, it is widely accepted that the underly-
ing notion of the resulting trust is that it is imposed
“to return property to the person who gave it and is
entitled to it beneficially, from someone else who
has title to it. Thus, the beneficial interest ‘results’
(jumps back) to the true owner”: Oosterhoff, at p.
25. There is also widespread agreement that, tradi-
tionally, resulting trusts arose where there had been
a gratuitous transfer or where the purposes set out
by an express or implied trust failed to exhaust the
trust property: Waters’, at p. 21.

[17] Resulting trusts arising from gratuitous
transfers are the ones relevant to domestic situa-
tions. The traditional view was they arose in two
types of situations: the gratuitous transfer of prop-
erty from one partner to the other, and the joint
contribution by two partners to the acquisition of
property, title to which is in the name of only one
of them. In either case, the transfer is gratuitous, in
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


the first case because there was no consideration
for the transfer of the property, and in the second
case because there was no consideration for the
contribution to the acquisition of the property.

[18] The Court’s most recent decision in relation




to resulting trusts is consistent with the view that,
in these gratuitous transfer situations, the actual
intention of the grantor is the governing consid-
eration: Pecore v. Pecore, 2007 SCC 17, [2007] 1
S.C.R. 795, at paras. 43-44. As Rothstein J. noted
at para. 44 of Pecore, where a gratuitous transfer is
being challenged, “[t]he trial judge will commence
his or her inquiry with the applicable presumption
and will weigh all of the evidence in an attempt to
ascertain, on a balance of probabilities, the trans-
feror’s actual intention” (emphasis added).

[19] As noted by Rothstein J. in this passage,
presumptions may come into play when dealing
with gratuitous transfers. The law generally pre-
sumes that the grantor intended to create a trust,
rather than to make a gift, and so the presumption
of resulting trust will often operate. As Rothstein
J. explained, a presumption of a resulting trust is
the general rule that applies to gratuitous transfers.
When such a transfer is made, the onus will be on
the person receiving the transfer to demonstrate
that a gift was intended. Otherwise, the transferee
holds that property in trust for the transferor. This
presumption rests on the principle that equity pre-
sumes bargains and not gifts (Pecore, at para. 24).

[20] The presumption of resulting trust, how-
ever, is neither universal nor irrebuttable. So, for
example, in the case of transfers between persons
in certain relationships (such as from a parent to
a minor child), a presumption of advancement —
that is, a presumption that the grantor intended to
make a gift — rather than a presumption of result-
ing trust applies: see Pecore, at paras. 27-41. The
presumption of advancement traditionally applied
to grants from husband to wife, but the presump-
tion of resulting trust traditionally applied to
288


grants from wife to husband. Whether the appli-
cation of the presumption of advancement applies
to unmarried couples may be more controversial:
Oosterhoff, at pp. 681-82. Although the trial judge
in Kerr touched on this issue, neither party relies
on the presumption of advancement and I need say
nothing further about it.





[21] That brings me to the “common intention”
resulting trust. It figured prominently in the major-
ity judgment in Murdoch v. Murdoch, [1975] 1
S.C.R. 423. Quoting from Lord Diplock’s speech in
Gissing v. Gissing, [1970] 2 All E.R. 780 (H.L.), at
pp. 789 and 793, Martland J. held for the majority
that, absent a financial contribution to the acqui-
sition of the contested property, a resulting trust
could only arise “where the court is satisfied by
the words or conduct of the parties that it was their
common intention that the beneficial interest was
not to belong solely to the spouse in whom the legal
estate was vested but was to be shared between
them in some proportion or other”: Murdoch, at
p. 438.

[22] This approach was repeated and followed by
a majority of the Court three years later in Rathwell,
at pp. 451-53, although the Court also unanimously
found there had been a direct financial contribution
by the claimant. In Rathwell, there is, as well, some
blurring of the notions of contribution and common
intention; there are references to the fact that a pre-
sumption of resulting trust is sometimes explained
by saying that the fact of contribution evidences the
common intention to share ownership: see p. 452,
per Dickson J. (as he then was); p. 474, per Ritchie
J. This blurring is also evident in the reasons of
the Court of Appeal in Kerr, where the court said,
at para. 42, that “[a] resulting trust is an equitable
doctrine that, by operation of law, imposes a trust
on a party who holds legal title to property that was
gratuitously transferred to that party by another
and where there is evidence of a common intention
that the property was to be shared by both parties”
(emphasis added).
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


[23] The Court’s development of the common
intention resulting trust ended with Pettkus, in
which Dickson J. (as he then was) noted the “many
difficulties, chronicled in the cases and in the
legal literature” as well as the “artificiality of the
common intention approach” to resulting trusts: at
pp. 842-43. He also clearly rejected the notion that




the requisite common intention could be attributed
to the parties where such an intention was negated
by the evidence: p. 847. The import of Pettkus was
that the law of unjust enrichment, coupled with
the remedial constructive trust, became the more
flexible and appropriate lens through which to
view property and financial disputes in domestic
situations. As Ms. Kerr stated in her factum, the
“approach enunciated in Pettkus v. Becker has
become the dominant legal paradigm for the reso-
lution of property disputes between common law
spouses” (para. 100).

[24] This, in my view, is as it should be, and the
time has come to say that the common intention
resulting trust has no further role to play in the res-
olution of domestic cases. I say this for four rea-
sons.

[25] First, as the abundant scholarly criticism
demonstrates, the common intention resulting trust
is doctrinally unsound. It is inconsistent with the
underlying principles of resulting trust law. Where
the issue of intention is relevant to the finding of
resulting trust, it is the intention of the grantor or
contributor alone that counts. As Professor Waters
puts it, “In imposing a resulting trust upon the
recipient, Equity is never concerned with [common]
intention” (Waters’, at p. 431). The underlying prin-
ciples of resulting trust law also make it hard to
accommodate situations in which the contribu-
tion made by the claimant was not in the form of
property or closely linked to its acquisition. The
point of the resulting trust is that the claimant is
asking for his or her own property back, or for
the recognition of his or her proportionate inter-
est in the asset which the other has acquired with
290


that property. This thinking extends artificially to
claims that are based on contributions that are not
clearly associated with the acquisition of an inter-
est in property; in such cases there is not, in any
meaningful sense, a “resulting” back of the trans-
ferred property: Waters’, at p. 432. It follows that
a resulting trust based solely on intention without




a transfer of property is, as Oosterhoff puts it, a
doctrinal impossibility: “. . . a resulting trust can
arise only when one person has transferred assets
to, or purchased assets for, another person and did
not intend to make a gift of the property”: p. 642.
The final doctrinal problem is that the relevant time
for ascertaining intention is the time of acquisition
of the property. As a result, it is hard to see how a
resulting trust can arise from contributions made
over time to the improvement of an existing asset,
or contributions in kind over time for its mainte-
nance. As Oosterhoff succinctly puts it at p. 652,
a resulting trust is inappropriate in these circum-
stances because its imposition, in effect, forces one
party to give up beneficial ownership which he or
she enjoyed before the improvement or mainte-
nance occurred.

[26] There are problems beyond these doctrinal
issues. A second difficulty with the common inten-
tion resulting trust is that the notion of common
intention may be highly artificial, particularly in
domestic cases. The search for common intention
may easily become “a mere vehicle or formula”
for giving a share of an asset, divorced from any
realistic assessment of the actual intention of the
parties. Dickson J. in Pettkus noted the artificial-
ity and undue malleability of the common intention
approach: at pp. 843-44.

[27] Third, the “common intention” resulting
trust in Canada evolved from a misreading of some
imprecise language in early authorities from the
House of Lords. While much has been written on
this topic, it is sufficient for my purposes to note,
as did Dickson J. in Pettkus, at p. 842, that the prin-
ciples upon which the common intention resulting
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


trust jurisprudence developed are found in the
House of Lords decisions in Pettitt v. Pettitt, [1970]
A.C. 777, and Gissing. However, no clear majority
opinion emerged in those cases and four of the five
Law Lords in Gissing spoke of “resulting, implied
or constructive trusts” without distinction. The pas-
sages that have been most influential in Canada on




this point, those authored by Lord Diplock, in fact
relate to constructive rather than resulting trusts:
see, e.g., Waters’, at pp. 430-35; Oosterhoff, at pp.
642-43. I find persuasive Professor Waters’ com-
ments, specifically approved by Dickson J. in
Pettkus, that where the search for common inten-
tion becomes simply a vehicle for reaching what
the court perceives to be a just result, “[i]t is in
fact a constructive trust approach masquerading as
a resulting trust approach”: D. Waters, Comment
(1975), 53 Can. Bar Rev. 366, at p. 368.

[28] Finally, as the development of the law since
Pettkus has shown, the principles of unjust enrich-
ment, coupled with the possible remedy of a con-
structive trust, provide a much less artificial, more
comprehensive and more principled basis to address
the wide variety of circumstances that lead to
claims arising out of domestic partnerships. There
is no need for any artificial inquiry into common
intent. Claims for compensation as well as for
property interests may be addressed. Contributions
of all kinds and made at all times may be justly
considered. The equities of the particular case are
considered transparently and according to princi-
ple, rather than masquerading behind often artifi-
cial attempts to find common intent to support what
the court thinks for unstated reasons is a just result.

[29] I would hold that the resulting trust arising
solely from the common intention of the parties, as
described by the Court in Murdoch and Rathwell,
292


no longer has a useful role to play in resolving
property and financial disputes in domestic cases.
I emphasize that I am speaking here only of the
common intention resulting trust. I am not address-
ing other aspects of the law relating to resulting
trusts, nor am I suggesting that a resulting trust that
would otherwise validly arise is defeated by the




existence in fact of common intention.
III. Unjust Enrichment

A. Introduction

[30] The law of unjust enrichment has been the
primary vehicle to address claims of inequitable
distribution of assets on the breakdown of a domes-
tic relationship. In a series of decisions, the Court
has developed a sturdy framework within which to
address these claims. However, a number of doc-
trinal and practical issues require further attention.
I will first briefly set out the existing framework,
then articulate the issues that in my view require
further attention, and finally propose the ways in
which they should be addressed.
B. The Legal Framework for Unjust Enrichment
Claims

[31] At the heart of the doctrine of unjust enrich-
ment lies the notion of restoring a benefit which
justice does not permit one to retain: Peel (Regional
Municipality) v. Canada, [1992] 3 S.C.R. 762, at p.
788. For recovery, something must have been given
by the plaintiff and received and retained by the
defendant without juristic reason. A series of cat-
egories developed in which retention of a conferred
benefit was considered unjust. These included, for
example: benefits conferred under mistakes of fact
or law; under compulsion; out of necessity; as a
result of ineffective transactions; or at the defend-
ant’s request: see Peel, at p. 789; see, generally,
G. H. L. Fridman, Restitution (2nd ed. 1992), c.
3-5, 7, 8 and 10; and Lord Goff of Chieveley and
G. Jones, The Law of Restitution (7th ed. 2007), c.
4-11, 17 and 19-26.
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


[32] Canadian law, however, does not limit unjust
enrichment claims to these categories. It permits
recovery whenever the plaintiff can establish three
elements: an enrichment of or benefit to the defend-
ant, a corresponding deprivation of the plaintiff,
and the absence of a juristic reason for the enrich-
ment: Pettkus; Peel, at p. 784. By retaining the




existing categories, while recognizing other claims
that fall within the principles underlying unjust
enrichment, the law is able “to develop in a flexible
way as required to meet changing perceptions of
justice”: Peel, at p. 788.

[33] The application of unjust enrichment prin-
ciples to claims by domestic partners was resisted
until the Court’s 1980 decision in Pettkus. In
applying unjust enrichment principles to domes-
tic claims, however, the Court has been clear that
there is and should be no separate line of author-
ity for “family” cases developed within the law of
unjust enrichment. Rather, concern for clarity and
doctrinal integrity mandate that “the basic princi-
ples governing the rights and remedies for unjust
enrichment remain the same for all cases” (Peter v.
Beblow, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 980, at p. 997).

[34] Although the legal principles remain con-
stant across subject areas, they must be applied
in the particular factual and social context out of
which the claim arises. The Court in Peter was
unanimously of the view that the courts “should
exercise flexibility and common sense when apply-
ing equitable principles to family law issues with
due sensitivity to the special circumstances that
can arise in such cases” (p. 997, per McLachlin J.
(as she then was); see also p. 1023, per Cory J.).
Thus, while the underlying legal principles of the
law of unjust enrichment are the same for all cases,
the courts must apply those common principles in
ways that respond to the particular context in which
they are to operate.
294


[35] It will be helpful to review, briefly, the cur-
rent state of the law with respect to each of the ele-
ments of an unjust enrichment claim and note the
particular issues in relation to each that arise in
claims by domestic partners.

C. The Elements of an Unjust Enrichment Claim





(1) Enrichment and Corresponding Depriva-
tion

[36] The first and second steps in the unjust
enrichment analysis concern first, whether the
defendant has been enriched by the plaintiff and
second, whether the plaintiff has suffered a corre-
sponding deprivation.

[37] The Court has taken a straightforward eco-
nomic approach to the first two elements — enrich-
ment and corresponding deprivation. Accordingly,
other considerations, such as moral and policy
questions, are appropriately dealt with at the juris-
tic reason stage of the analysis: see Peter, at p.
990, referring to Pettkus, Sorochan v. Sorochan,
[1986] 2 S.C.R. 38, and Peel, affirmed in Garland
v. Consumers’ Gas Co., 2004 SCC 25, [2004] 1
S.C.R. 629, at para. 31.

[38] For the first requirement — enrichment —
the plaintiff must show that he or she gave some-
thing to the defendant which the defendant received
and retained. The benefit need not be retained per-
manently, but there must be a benefit which has
enriched the defendant and which can be restored
to the plaintiff in specie or by money. Moreover, the
benefit must be tangible. It may be positive or nega-
tive, the latter in the sense that the benefit conferred
on the defendant spares him or her an expense he or
she would have had to undertake (Peel, at pp. 788
and 790; Garland, at paras. 31 and 37).

[39] Turning to the second element — a corre-
sponding deprivation — the plaintiff’s loss is mate-
rial only if the defendant has gained a benefit or
been enriched (Peel, at pp. 789-90). That is why
the second requirement obligates the plaintiff to
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


establish not simply that the defendant has been
enriched, but also that the enrichment corresponds
to a deprivation which the plaintiff has suffered
(Pettkus, at p. 852; Rathwell, at p. 455).

(2) Absence of Juristic Reason




[40] The third element of an unjust enrichment
claim is that the benefit and corresponding detri-
ment must have occurred without a juristic reason.
To put it simply, this means that there is no reason
in law or justice for the defendant’s retention of the
benefit conferred by the plaintiff, making its reten-
tion “unjust” in the circumstances of the case: see
Pettkus, at p. 848; Rathwell, at p. 456; Sorochan,
at p. 44; Peter, at p. 987; Peel, at pp. 784 and 788;
Garland, at para. 30.

[41] Juristic reasons to deny recovery may be the
intention to make a gift (referred to as a “donative
intent”), a contract, or a disposition of law (Peter,
at pp. 990-91; Garland, at para. 44; Rathwell, at
p. 455). The latter category generally includes cir-
cumstances where the enrichment of the defend-
ant at the plaintiff’s expense is required by law,
such as where a valid statute denies recovery
(P. D. Maddaugh and J. D. McCamus, The Law of
Restitution (1990), at p. 46; Reference re Goods
and Services Tax, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 445; Mack v.
Canada (Attorney General) (2002), 60 O.R. (3d)
737 (C.A.)). However, just as the Court has resisted
a purely categorical approach to unjust enrichment
claims, it has also refused to limit juristic reasons
to a closed list. This third stage of the unjust enrich-
ment analysis provides for due consideration of the
autonomy of the parties, including factors such as
“the legitimate expectation of the parties, the right
of parties to order their affairs by contract” (Peel,
at p. 803).

[42] A critical early question in domestic claims
was whether the provision of domestic services
could support a claim for unjust enrichment. After
296


some doubts, the matter was conclusively resolved
in Peter, where the Court held that they could. A
spouse or domestic partner generally has no duty, at
common law, equity, or by statute, to perform work
or services for the other. It follows, on a straight-
forward economic approach, that there is no reason
to distinguish domestic services from other contri-




butions (Peter, at pp. 991 and 993; Sorochan, at p.
46). They constitute an enrichment because such
services are of great value to the family and to the
other spouse; any other conclusion devalues contri-
butions, mostly by women, to the family economy
(Peter, at p. 993). The unpaid provision of services
(including domestic services) or labour may also
constitute a deprivation because the full-time devo-
tion of one’s labour and earnings without compen-
sation may readily be viewed as such. The Court
rejected the view that such services could not found
an unjust enrichment claim because they are per-
formed out of “natural love and affection” (Peter,
at pp. 989-95, per McLachlin J., and pp. 1012-16,
per Cory J.).
[43] In Garland, the Court set out a two-step
analysis for the absence of juristic reason. It is
important to remember that what prompted this
development was to ensure that the juristic reason
analysis was not “purely subjective”, thereby build-
ing into the unjust enrichment analysis an unac-
ceptable “immeasurable judicial discretion” that
would permit “case by case ‘palm tree’ justice”:
Garland, at para. 40. The first step of the juristic
reason analysis applies the established categories
of juristic reasons; in their absence, the second step
permits consideration of the reasonable expecta-
tions of the parties and public policy considerations
to assess whether recovery should be denied:
First, the plaintiff must show that no juristic reason from
an established category exists to deny recovery. . . . The
established categories that can constitute juristic rea-
sons include a contract (Pettkus, supra), a disposition
of law (Pettkus, supra), a donative intent (Peter, supra),
and other valid common law, equitable or statutory
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


obligations (Peter, supra). If there is no juristic reason
from an established category, then the plaintiff has
made out a prima facie case under the juristic reason
component of the analysis.
The prima facie case is rebuttable, however, where
the defendant can show that there is another reason to




deny recovery. As a result, there is a de facto burden of
proof placed on the defendant to show the reason why
the enrichment should be retained. This stage of the
analysis thus provides for a category of residual defence
in which courts can look to all of the circumstances of
the transaction in order to determine whether there is
another reason to deny recovery.
As part of the defendant’s attempt to rebut, courts
should have regard to two factors: the reasonable expec-
tations of the parties, and public policy considerations.
[paras. 44-46]

[44] Thus, at the juristic reason stage of the
analysis, if the case falls outside the existing cat-
egories, the court may take into account the legit-
imate expectations of the parties (Pettkus, at p.
849) and moral and policy-based arguments about
whether particular enrichments are unjust (Peter, at
p. 990). For example, in Peter, it was at this stage
that the Court considered and rejected the argu-
ment that the provision of domestic and childcare
services should not give rise to equitable claims
against the other spouse in a marital or quasi-
marital relationship (pp. 993-95). Overall, the test
for juristic reason is flexible, and the relevant fac-
tors to consider will depend on the situation before
the court (Peter, at p. 990).

[45] Policy arguments concerning individual
autonomy may arise under the second branch of the
juristic reason analysis. In the context of claims for
unjust enrichment, this has led to questions regard-
ing how (and when) factors relating to the manner
in which the parties organized their relationship
should be taken into account. It has been argued,
for example, that the legislative decision to exclude
unmarried couples from property division legisla-
tion indicates the court should not use the equita-
ble doctrine of unjust enrichment to address their
property and asset disputes. However, the court in
298


Peter rejected this argument, noting that it misap-
prehended the role of equity. As McLachlin J. put
it at p. 994, “It is precisely where an injustice arises
without a legal remedy that equity finds a role.”
(See also Nova Scotia (Attorney General) v. Walsh,
2002 SCC 83, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 325, at para. 61.)





(3) Remedy

[46] Remedies for unjust enrichment are restitu-
tionary in nature; that is, the object of the remedy
is to require the defendant to repay or reverse the
unjustified enrichment. A successful claim for
unjust enrichment may attract either a “personal
restitutionary award” or a “restitutionary propri-
etary award”. In other words, the plaintiff may be
entitled to a monetary or a proprietary remedy (Lac
Minerals Ltd. v. International Corona Resources
Ltd., [1989] 2 S.C.R. 574, at p. 669, per La Forest J.).

(a) Monetary Award

[47] The first remedy to consider is always a
monetary award (Peter, at pp. 987 and 999). In most
cases, it will be sufficient to remedy the unjust
enrichment. However, calculation of such an award
is far from straightforward. Two issues have given
rise to disagreement and difficulty in domestic
unjust enrichment claims.

[48] First, the fact that many domestic claims
of unjust enrichment arise out of relationships in
which there has been a mutual conferral of ben-
efits gives rise to difficulties in determining what
will constitute adequate compensation. While the
value of domestic services is not questioned (Peter;
Sorochan), it is unjust to pay attention only to the
contributions of one party in assessing an appropri-
ate remedy. This is not only an important issue of
principle; in practice, it is enormously difficult for
the parties and the court to “create, retroactively, a
notional ledger to record and value every service
rendered by each party to the other” (R. E. Scane,
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


“Relationships ‘Tantamount to Spousal’, Unjust
Enrichment, and Constructive Trusts” (1991), 70
Can. Bar Rev. 260, at p. 281). This gives rise to the
practical problem that one scholar has aptly referred
to as “duelling quantum meruits” (J. D. McCamus,
“Restitution on Dissolution of Marital and Other
Intimate Relationships: Constructive Trust or




Quantum Meruit?”, in J. W. Neyers, M. McInnes
and S. G. A. Pitel, eds., Understanding Unjust
Enrichment (2004), 359, at p. 376). McLachlin J.
also alluded to this practical problem in Peter, at
p. 999.

[49] A second difficulty arises from the fact that
some courts and commentators have read Peter as
holding that when a monetary award is appropri-
ate, it must invariably be calculated on the basis of
the monetary value of the unpaid services. This is
often referred to as the quantum meruit, or “value
received” or “fee-for-services” approach. This was
followed in Bell v. Bailey (2001), 203 D.L.R. (4th)
589 (Ont. C.A.). Other appellate courts have held
that monetary relief may be assessed more flex-
ibly — in effect, on a value survived basis — by
reference, for example, to the overall increase in
the couple’s wealth during the relationship: Wilson
v. Fotsch, 2010 BCCA 226, 319 D.L.R. (4th) 26, at
para. 50; Pickelein v. Gillmore (1997), 30 B.C.L.R.
(3d) 44 (C.A.); Harrison v. Kalinocha (1994), 90
B.C.L.R. (2d) 273 (C.A.); MacFarlane v. Smith,
2003 NBCA 6, 256 N.B.R. (2d) 108, at paras.
31-34 and 41-43; Shannon v. Gidden, 1999 BCCA
539, 71 B.C.L.R. (3d) 40, at para. 37. With respect
to inconsistencies in how in personam relief for
unjust enrichment may be quantified, see also
Matrimonial Property Law in Canada (loose-
leaf), vol. 1, by J. G. McLeod and A. A. Mamo,
eds., at pp. 40.78-40.79.

(b) Proprietary Award

[50] The Court has recognized that, in some
cases, when a monetary award is inappropriate or
insufficient, a proprietary remedy may be required.
Pettkus is responsible for an important remedial
300


feature of the Canadian law of unjust enrichment:
the development of the remedial constructive trust.
Imposed without reference to intention to create a
trust, the constructive trust is a broad and flexible
equitable tool used to determine beneficial entitle-
ment to property (Pettkus, at pp. 843-44 and 847-
48). Where the plaintiff can demonstrate a link or




causal connection between his or her contributions
and the acquisition, preservation, maintenance or
improvement of the disputed property, a share of
the property proportionate to the unjust enrichment
can be impressed with a constructive trust in his or
her favour (Pettkus, at pp. 852-53; Sorochan, at p.
50). Pettkus made clear that these principles apply
equally to unmarried cohabitants, since “[t]he equi-
table principle on which the remedy of construc-
tive trust rests is broad and general; its purpose is
to prevent unjust enrichment in whatever circum-
stances it occurs” (pp. 850-51).

[51] As to the nature of the link required between
the contribution and the property, the Court has
consistently held that the plaintiff must demon-
strate a “sufficiently substantial and direct” link,
a “causal connection” or a “nexus” between the
plaintiff’s contributions and the property which is
the subject matter of the trust (Peter, at pp. 988, 997
and 999; Pettkus at p. 852; Sorochan, at pp. 47-50;
Rathwell, at p. 454). A minor or indirect contribu-
tion will not suffice (Peter, at p. 997). As Dickson
C.J. put it in Sorochan, the primary focus is on
whether the contributions have a “clear proprietary
relationship” (p. 50, citing Professor McLeod’s
annotation of Herman v. Smith (1984), 42 R.F.L.
(2d) 154, at p. 156). Indirect contributions of money
and direct contributions of labour may suffice, pro-
vided that a connection is established between the
plaintiff’s deprivation and the acquisition, preser-
vation, maintenance, or improvement of the prop-
erty (Sorochan, at p. 50; Pettkus, at p. 852).

[52] The plaintiff must also establish that a mon-
etary award would be insufficient in the circum-
stances (Peter, at p. 999). In this regard, the court
may take into account the probability of recovery,
as well as whether there is a reason to grant the
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


plaintiff the additional rights that flow from recog-
nition of property rights (Lac Minerals, at p. 678,
per La Forest J.).

[53] The extent of the constructive trust inter-
est should be proportionate to the claimant’s con-




tributions. Where the contributions are unequal,
the shares will be unequal (Pettkus, at pp. 852-
53; Rathwell, at p. 448; Peter, at pp. 998-99). As
Dickson J. put it in Rathwell, “The court will assess
the contributions made by each spouse and make
a fair, equitable distribution having regard to the
respective contributions” (p. 454).

D. Areas Needing Clarification

[54] While the law of unjust enrichment sets out
a sturdy legal framework within which to address
claims by domestic partners, three areas continue
to generate controversy and require clarification.
As mentioned earlier, these are as follows: the
approach to the assessment of a monetary award
for a successful unjust enrichment claim, how and
where to address the mutual benefit problem, and
the role of the parties’ reasonable or legitimate
expectations. I will address these in turn.

E. Is a Monetary Award Restricted to Quantum
Meruit?

(1) Introduction

[55] As noted earlier, remedies for unjust enrich-
ment may either be proprietary (normally a remedial
constructive trust) or personal (normally a money
remedy). Once the choice has been made to award
a monetary rather than a proprietary remedy, the
question of how to quantify that monetary remedy
arises. Some courts have held that monetary relief
must always be calculated based on a value received
or quantum meruit basis (Bell), while others have
held that monetary relief may also be based on a
value survived (i.e. by reference to the value of
property) approach (Wilson; Pickelein; Harrison;
MacFarlane; Shannon). If, as some courts have
302


held, a monetary remedy must invariably be quan-
tified on a quantum meruit basis, the remedial
choice in unjust enrichment cases becomes whether
to impose a constructive trust or order a monetary
remedy calculated on a quantum meruit basis. One
scholar has referred to this approach as the false
dichotomy between constructive trust and quantum




meruit (McCamus, at pp. 375-76). Scholars have
also noted this area of uncertainty in the case law,
and have suggested that an in personam remedy
using the value survived measure is a plausible
alternative to the constructive trust (McCamus,
at p. 377; P. Birks, An Introduction to the Law of
Restitution (1985), at pp. 394-95). As I will explain
below, Peter is said to have established this dichot-
omy of remedial choice. However, in my view, the
focus in Peter was on the availability of the con-
structive trust remedy, and that case should not be
taken as limiting the calculation of monetary relief
for unjust enrichment to a quantum meruit basis. In
appropriate circumstances, monetary relief may be
assessed on a value survived basis.

[56] I will first briefly describe the genesis of
the purported limitation on the monetary remedy.
Then I will explain why, in my view, it should be
rejected. Finally, I will set out my views on how
money remedies for unjust enrichment claims in
domestic situations should be approached.

(2) The Remedial Dichotomy

[57] As noted, there is a widespread, although not
unanimous, view that there are only two choices of
remedy for an unjust enrichment: a monetary award,
assessed on a fee-for-services basis; or a proprie-
tary one (generally taking the form of a remedial
constructive trust), where the claimant can show
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


that the benefit conferred contributed to the acqui-
sition, preservation, maintenance, or improvement
of specific property. Some brief comments in Peter
seem to have spawned this idea, which is reflected
in a number of appellate authorities. For instance,
in the Vanasse appeal, the Ontario Court of Appeal
reasoned that since Ms. Vanasse could not show




that her contributions were linked to specific prop-
erty, her claim had to be quantified on a fee-for-
services basis. I respectfully do not agree that mon-
etary awards for unjust enrichment must always be
calculated in this way.

(3) Why the Remedial Dichotomy Should Be
Rejected

[58] In my view, restricting the money remedy to
a fee-for-services calculation is inappropriate for
four reasons. First, it fails to reflect the reality of
the lives of many domestic partners. Second, it is
inconsistent with the inherent flexibility of unjust
enrichment. Third, it ignores the historical basis of
quantum meruit claims. Finally, it is not mandated
by the Court’s judgment in Peter. For those reasons,
this remedial dichotomy should be rejected. The
discussion which follows is concerned only with
the quantification of a monetary remedy for unjust
enrichment; the law relating to when a proprietary
remedy should be granted is well established and
remains unchanged.

(a) Life Experience

[59] The remedial dichotomy would be appro-
priate if, in fact, the bases of all domestic unjust
enrichment claims fit into only two categories —
those where the enrichment consists of the provi-
sion of unpaid services, and those where it consists
304


of an unrecognized contribution to the acquisi-
tion, improvement, maintenance or preservation of
specific property. To be sure, those two bases for
unjust enrichment claims exist. However, all unjust
enrichment cases cannot be neatly divided into
these two categories.





[60] At least one other basis for an unjust enrich-
ment claim is easy to identify. It consists of cases
in which the contributions of both parties over
time have resulted in an accumulation of wealth.
The unjust enrichment occurs following the break-
down of their relationship when one party retains
a disproportionate share of the assets which are
the product of their joint efforts. The required link
between the contributions and a specific property
may not exist, making it inappropriate to confer
a proprietary remedy. However, there may clearly
be a link between the joint efforts of the parties
and the accumulation of wealth; in other words, a
link between the “value received” and the “value
surviving”, as McLachlin J. put it in Peter, at pp.
1000-1001. Thus, where there is a relationship
that can be described as a “joint family venture”,
and the joint efforts of the parties are linked to
the accumulation of wealth, the unjust enrich-
ment should be thought of as leaving one party
with a disproportionate share of the jointly earned
assets.

[61] There is nothing new about the notion of a
joint family venture in which both parties contrib-
ute to their overall accumulation of wealth. It was
recognition of this reality that contributed to com-
prehensive matrimonial property legislative reform
in the late 1970s and early 1980s. As the Court put
it in Clarke v. Clarke, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 795, at p. 807
(in relation to Nova Scotia’s Matrimonial Property
Act), “. . . the Act supports the equality of both par-
ties to a marriage and recognizes the joint contri-
bution of the spouses, be it financial or otherwise,
to that enterprise. . . . The Act is accordingly reme-
dial in nature. It was designed to alleviate the ineq-
uities of the past when the contribution made by
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


women to the economic survival and growth of the
family was not recognized” (emphasis added).

[62] Unlike much matrimonial property legisla-
tion, the law of unjust enrichment does not man-




date a presumption of equal sharing. However, the
law of unjust enrichment can and should respond
to the social reality identified by the legislature
that many domestic relationships are more realisti-
cally viewed as a joint venture to which the parties
jointly contribute.

[63] This reality has also been recognized many
times and in many contexts by the Court. For
instance, in Murdoch, Laskin J. (as he then was),
in dissent, would have imposed constructive trust
relief, on the basis that the facts were “consistent
with a pooling of effort by the spouses” to establish
themselves in a ranch operation (p. 457), and that
the spouses had worked together for fifteen years
to improve “their lot in life through progressively
larger acquisitions of ranch property” (p. 446).
Similarly, in Rathwell, a majority of the judges
agreed that Mr. and Mrs. Rathwell had pooled their
efforts to accumulate wealth as a team. Dickson J.
emphasized that the parties had together “decided
to make farming their way of life” (p. 444), and that
the acquisition of property in Mr. Rathwell’s name
was only made possible through their “joint effort”
and “team work” (p. 461).

[64] A similar recognition is evident in Pettkus
and Peter.

[65] In Pettkus, the parties developed a success-
ful beekeeping business, the profits from which
they used to acquire real property. Dickson J., writ-
ing for the majority of the Court, emphasized facts
suggestive of a domestic and financial partnership.
He observed that “each started with nothing; each
worked continuously, unremittingly and sedulously
in the joint effort” (p. 853); that each contributed
306


to the “good fortune of the common enterprise” (p.
838); that Wilson J.A. (as she then was) at the Court
of Appeal had found the wealth they accumulated
was through “joint effort” and “teamwork” (p.
849); and finally, that “[t]heir lives and their eco-
nomic well-being were fully integrated” (p. 850).





[66] I agree with Professor McCamus that
the Court in Pettkus was “satisfied that the par-
ties were engaged in a common venture in which
they expected to share the benefits flowing from
the wealth that they jointly created” (p. 367). Put
another way, Mr. Pettkus was not unjustly enriched
because Ms. Becker had a precise expectation of
obtaining a legal interest in certain properties, but
rather because they were in reality partners in a
common venture.

[67] The significance of the fact that wealth had
been acquired through joint effort was again at the
forefront of the analysis in Peter where the parties
lived together for 12 years in a common law rela-
tionship. While Mr. Beblow generated most of the
family income and also contributed to the main-
tenance of the property, Ms. Peter did all of the
domestic work (including raising the six children of
their blended family), helped with property mainte-
nance, and was solely responsible for the property
when Mr. Beblow was away. The reality of their
joint venture was acknowledged when McLachlin
J. wrote that the “joint family venture, in effect,
was no different from the farm which was the sub-
ject of the trust in Pettkus v. Becker” (p. 1001).

[68] The Court’s recognition of the joint family
venture is evident in three other places in Peter.
First, in reference to the appropriateness of the
“value survived” measure of relief, McLachlin J.
observed, “it is more likely that a couple expects
to share in the wealth generated from their part-
nership, rather than to receive compensation for
the services performed during the relationship” (p.
999). Second, and also related to valuing the extent
of the unjust enrichment, McLachlin J. noted that,
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


in a case where both parties had contributed to the
“family venture”, it was appropriate to look to all of
the family assets, rather than simply one of them,
to approximate the value of the claimant’s con-
tributions to that family venture (p. 1001). Third,
the Court’s justification for affirming the value of
domestic services was, in part, based on reasoning




that such services are often proffered in the context
of a common venture (p. 993).

[69] Relationships of this nature are common in
our life experience. For many domestic relation-
ships, the couple’s venture may only sensibly be
viewed as a joint one, making it highly artificial
in theory and extremely difficult in practice to do
a detailed accounting of the contributions made
and benefits received on a fee-for-services basis.
Of course, this is a relationship-specific issue;
there can be no presumption one way or the other.
However, the legal consequences of the breakdown
of a domestic relationship should reflect realisti-
cally the way people live their lives. It should not
impose on them the need to engage in an artificial
balance sheet approach which does not reflect the
true nature of their relationship.

(b) Flexibility

[70] Maintaining a strict remedial dichotomy is
inconsistent with the Court’s approach to equitable
remedies in general, and to its development of rem-
edies for unjust enrichment in particular.

[71] The Court has often emphasized the flex-
ibility of equitable remedies and the need to fash-
ion remedies that respond to various situations
in principled and realistic ways. So, for exam-
ple, when speaking of equitable compensation for
breach of confidence, Binnie J. affirmed that “the
Court has ample jurisdiction to fashion appropri-
ate relief out of the full gamut of available rem-
edies, including appropriate financial compensa-
tion”: Cadbury Schweppes Inc. v. FBI Foods Ltd.,
308


[1999] 1 S.C.R. 142, at para. 61. At para. 24, he
noted the broad approach to equitable remedies
for breach of confidence taken by the Court in Lac
Minerals. In doing so, he cited this statement with
approval: “. . . the remedy that follows [once liabil-
ity is established] should be the one that is most
appropriate on the facts of the case rather than one




derived from history or over-categorization” (from
J. D. Davies, “Duties of Confidence and Loyalty”,
[1990] L.M.C.L.Q. 4, at p. 5). Similarly, in the con-
text of the constructive trust, McLachlin J. (as she
then was) noted that “[e]quitable remedies are flex-
ible; their award is based on what is just in all the
circumstances of the case”: Soulos v. Korkontzilas,
[1997] 2 S.C.R. 217, at para. 34.

[72] Turning specifically to remedies for unjust
enrichment, I refer to Binnie J.’s comments in
Pacific National Investments Ltd. v. Victoria (City),
2004 SCC 75, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 575, at para. 13. He
noted that the doctrine of unjust enrichment, while
predicated on clearly defined principles, “retains a
large measure of remedial flexibility to deal with
different circumstances according to principles
rooted in fairness and good conscience”. Moreover,
the Court has recognized that, given the wide vari-
ety of circumstances addressed by the traditional
categories of unjust enrichment, as well as the
flexibility of the broader, principled approach, its
development has been characterized by, and indeed
requires, recourse to a number of different sorts
of remedies depending on the circumstances: see
Peter, at p. 987; Sorochan, at p. 47.

[73] Thus, the remedy should mirror the flex-
ibility inherent in the unjust enrichment principle
itself, so as to allow the court to respond appropri-
ately to the substance of the problem put before it.
This means that a monetary remedy must match,
as best it can, the extent of the enrichment unjustly
retained by the defendant. There is no reason to
think that the wide range of circumstances that
may give rise to unjust enrichment claims will
necessarily fall into one or the other of the two
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


remedial options into which some have tried to force
them.
(c) History
[74] Imposing a strict remedial dichotomy is also
inconsistent with the historical development of the




unjust enrichment principle. Unjust enrichment
developed through several particular categories of
cases. Quantum meruit, the origin of the fee-for-
services award, was only one of them. Quantum
meruit originated as a common law claim for com-
pensation for benefits conferred under an agreement
which, while apparently binding, was rendered
ineffective for a reason recognized at common law.
The scope of the claim was expanded over time, and
the measure of a quantum meruit award was flex-
ible. It might be assessed, for example, by the cost
to the plaintiff of providing the service, the market
value of the benefit, or even the value placed on
the benefit by the recipient: P. D. Maddaugh and
J. D. McCamus, The Law of Restitution (loose-leaf
ed.), vol. I, at §4:200.30. The important point, how-
ever, is that quantum meruit is simply one of the
established categories of unjust enrichment claims.
There is no reason in principle why one of the tra-
ditional categories of unjust enrichment should be
used to force the monetary remedy for all present
domestic unjust enrichment cases into a remedial
straitjacket.
(d) Peter v. Beblow
[75] Peter does not mandate strict adherence to
a quantum meruit approach to money remedies for
unjust enrichment. One must remember that the
focus of Peter was on whether the plaintiff’s con-
tributions entitled her to a constructive trust over
the former family home. While it was assumed by
both McLachlin J. and Cory J., who wrote concur-
ring reasons in the case, that a money award would
be fashioned on the basis of quantum meruit, that
was not an issue, let alone a holding, in the case.
310


[76] There are, in fact, only two sentences in the
judgments that could be taken as supporting the
view that this rule should always apply. At p. 995,
McLachlin J. said, “Two remedies are possible: an
award of money on the basis of the value of the
services rendered, i.e. quantum meruit; and the one
the trial judge awarded, title to the house based on




a constructive trust”; at p. 999, she wrote that “[f]or
a monetary award, the ‘value received’ approach is
appropriate”. Given that the focus of the case was
deciding whether a proprietary remedy was appro-
priate, I would not read these two brief passages
as laying down the sweeping rule that a monetary
award must always be calculated on a fee-for-
services basis.

[77] Moreover, McLachlin J. noted that the doc-
trine of unjust enrichment applies to a variety of
situations, and that successful claims have been
addressed through a number of remedies, depend-
ing on the circumstances. Only one of these reme-
dies is a payment for services rendered on the basis
of quantum meruit: p. 987. There is nothing in this
observation to suggest that the Court decided to
opt for a one-size-fits-all monetary remedy, espe-
cially when such an approach would be contrary
to the very flexibility that the Court has repeatedly
affirmed with regards to the law of unjust enrich-
ment and corresponding remedies.

[78] This restrictive reading of Peter is not con-
sistent with the underlying nature of the claim
founded on the principles set out in Pettkus. As
Professor McCamus has suggested, cases like
Pettkus rest on a claimant’s right to share surplus
wealth created by joint effort and teamwork. It fol-
lows that a remedy based on notional fees for ser-
vices is not responsive to the underlying nature of
that claim: McCamus, at pp. 376-77. In my view,
this reasoning is persuasive whether the joint effort
has led to the accumulation of specific property,
in which case a remedial constructive trust may be
appropriate according to the well-settled principles
in that area of trust law, or where the joint effort has
led to an accumulation of assets generally. In the
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


latter instance, when appropriate, there is no reason
in principle why a monetary remedy cannot be
fashioned to reflect this basis of the enrichment and
corresponding deprivation. What is essential, in my
view, is that, in either type of case, there must be a
link between the contribution and the accumulation
of wealth, or to use the words of McLachlin J. in




Peter, between the “value received” and the “value
surviving”. Where that link exists, and a proprie-
tary remedy is either inappropriate or unnecessary,
the monetary award should be fashioned to reflect
the true nature of the enrichment and the corre-
sponding deprivation.

[79] Professor McCamus has suggested that the
equitable remedy of an accounting of profits could
be an appropriate remedial tool: p. 377. While I
would not discount that as a possibility, I doubt
that the complexity and technicality of that remedy
would be well suited to domestic situations, which
are more often than not rather straightforward.
The unjust enrichment principle is inherently flex-
ible and, in my view, the calculation of a monetary
award for a successful unjust enrichment claim
should be equally flexible. This is necessary to
respond, to the extent money can, to the particular
enrichment being addressed. To my way of think-
ing, Professor Fridman was right to say that “where
a claim for unjust enrichment has been made out
by the plaintiff, the court may award whatever
form of relief is most appropriate so as to ensure
that the plaintiff obtains that to which he or she is
entitled, regardless of whether the situation would
have been governed by common law or equitable
doctrines or whether the case would formerly have
been considered one for a personal or a proprietary
remedy” (p. 398).

(4) The Approach to the Monetary Remedy

[80] The next step in the legal development of
this area should be to move away from the false
remedial dichotomy between quantum meruit and
312


constructive trust, and to return to the underlying
principles governing the law of unjust enrichment.
These underlying principles focus on properly
characterizing the nature of the unjust enrichment
giving rise to the claim. As I have mentioned above,
not all unjust enrichments arising between domes-
tic partners fit comfortably into either a “fee-for-




services” or “a share of specific property” mold.
Where the unjust enrichment is best characterized
as an unjust retention of a disproportionate share
of assets accumulated during the course of what
McLachlin J. referred to in Peter (at p. 1001) as a
“joint family venture” to which both partners have
contributed, the monetary remedy should reflect
that fact.

[81] In such cases, the basis of the unjust enrich-
ment is the retention of an inappropriately dispro-
portionate amount of wealth by one party when the
parties have been engaged in a joint family ven-
ture and there is a clear link between the claimant’s
contributions to the joint venture and the accumu-
lation of wealth. Irrespective of the status of legal
title to particular assets, the parties in those cir-
cumstances are realistically viewed as “creating
wealth in a common enterprise that will assist in
sustaining their relationship, their well-being and
their family life” (McCamus, at p. 366). The wealth
created during the period of cohabitation will be
treated as the fruit of their domestic and financial
relationship, though not necessarily by the parties
in equal measure. Since the spouses are domestic
and financial partners, there is no need for “duel-
ling quantum meruits”. In such cases, the unjust
enrichment is understood to arise because the party
who leaves the relationship with a disproportion-
ate share of the wealth is denying to the claimant
a reasonable share of the wealth accumulated in
the course of the relationship through their joint
efforts. The monetary award for unjust enrichment
should be assessed by determining the proportion-
ate contribution of the claimant to the accumula-
tion of the wealth.

[82] This flexible approach to the money remedy
in unjust enrichment cases is fully consistent with
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


Walsh. While that case was focused on constitu-
tional issues that are not before us in this case, the
majority judgment was clearly not intended to freeze
the law of unjust enrichment in domestic cases; the
judgment indicates that the law of unjust enrich-
ment, including the remedial constructive trust, is
the preferable method of responding to the inequi-




ties brought about by the breakdown of a common
law relationship, since the remedies for unjust
enrichment “are tailored to the parties’ specific
situation and grievances” (para. 61). In short, while
emphasizing respect for autonomy as an important
value, the Court at the same time approved of the
continued development of the law of unjust enrich-
ment in order to respond to the plethora of forms
and functions of common law relationships.

[83] A similar approach was taken in Peter. Mr.
Beblow argued that the law of unjust enrichment
should not provide a share of property to unmar-
ried partners because the legislature had chosen
to exclude them from the rights accorded to mar-
ried spouses under matrimonial property legisla-
tion. This argument was succinctly — and flatly —
rejected with the remark that it is “precisely where
an injustice arises without a legal remedy that
equity finds a role”: p. 994.

[84] It is not the purpose of the law of unjust
enrichment to replicate for unmarried partners the
legislative presumption that married partners are
engaged in a joint family venture. However, there
is no reason in principle why remedies for unjust
enrichment should fail to reflect that reality in the
lives and relationships of unmarried partners.

[85] I conclude, therefore, that the common law
of unjust enrichment should recognize and respond
to the reality that there are unmarried domestic
arrangements that are partnerships; the remedy
in such cases should address the disproportionate
retention of assets acquired through joint efforts
314


with another person. This sort of sharing, of
course, should not be presumed, nor will it be pre-
sumed that wealth acquired by mutual effort will
be shared equally. Cohabitation does not, in itself,
under the common law of unjust enrichment, entitle
one party to a share of the other’s property or any
other relief. However, where wealth is accumulated




as a result of joint effort, as evidenced by the nature
of the parties’ relationship and their dealings with
each other, the law of unjust enrichment should
reflect that reality.

[86] Thus the rejection of the remedial dichotomy
leads us to consider in what circumstances an unjust
enrichment may be appropriately characterized as
a failure to share equitably assets acquired through
the parties’ joint efforts. While this approach will
need further refinement in future cases, I offer the
following as a broad outline of when this character-
ization of an unjust enrichment will be appropriate.

(5) Identifying Unjust Enrichment Arising
From a Joint Family Venture

[87] My view is that when the parties have been
engaged in a joint family venture, and the claim-
ant’s contributions to it are linked to the generation
of wealth, a monetary award for unjust enrichment
should be calculated according to the share of the
accumulated wealth proportionate to the claimant’s
contributions. In order to apply this approach, it is
first necessary to identify whether the parties have,
in fact, been engaged in a joint family venture. In
the preceding section, I reviewed the many occa-
sions on which the existence of a joint family ven-
ture has been recognized. From this rich set of fac-
tual circumstances, what emerge as the hallmarks
of such a relationship?

[88] It is critical to note that cohabiting cou-
ples are not a homogeneous group. It follows that
the analysis must take into account the particu-
lar circumstances of each particular relationship.
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


Furthermore, as previously stated, there can be no
presumption of a joint family venture. The goal is
for the law of unjust enrichment to attach just con-
sequences to the way the parties have lived their
lives, not to treat them as if they ought to have
lived some other way or conducted their relation-
ship on some different basis. A joint family ven-




ture can only be identified by the court when its
existence, in fact, is well grounded in the evidence.
The emphasis should be on how the parties actually
lived their lives, not on their ex post facto asser-
tions or the court’s view of how they ought to have
done so.

[89] In undertaking this analysis, it may be help-
ful to consider the evidence under four main head-
ings: mutual effort, economic integration, actual
intent and priority of the family. There is, of
course, overlap among factors that may be relevant
under these headings and there is no closed list of
relevant factors. What follows is not a checklist of
conditions for finding (or not finding) that the par-
ties were engaged in a joint family venture. These
headings, and the factors grouped under them,
simply provide a useful way to approach a global
analysis of the evidence and some examples of the
relevant factors that may be taken into account in
deciding whether or not the parties were engaged
in a joint family venture. The absence of the factors
I have set out, and many other relevant considera-
tions, may well negate that conclusion.

(a) Mutual Effort

[90] One set of factors concerns whether the
parties worked collaboratively towards common
goals. Indicators such as the pooling of effort and
team work, the decision to have and raise children
together, and the length of the relationship may all
point towards the extent, if any, to which the parties
have formed a true partnership and jointly worked
towards important mutual goals.

[91] Joint contributions, or contributions to a
common pool, may provide evidence of joint effort.
For instance, in Murdoch, central to Laskin J.’s
316


constructive trust analysis was that the parties had
pooled their efforts to establish themselves in a
ranch operation. Joint contributions were also an
important aspect of the Court’s analyses in Peter,
Sorochan, and Pettkus. Pooling of efforts and
resources, whether capital or income, has also
been noted in the appellate case law (see, e.g.,




Birmingham v. Ferguson, 2004 CanLII 4764 (Ont.
C.A.); McDougall v. Gesell Estate, 2001 MBCA
3, 153 Man. R. (2d) 54, at para. 14). The use of
parties’ funds entirely for family purposes may be
indicative of the pooling of resources: McDougall.
The parties may also be said to be pooling their
resources where one spouse takes on all, or a
greater proportion, of the domestic labour, freeing
the other spouse from those responsibilities, and
enabling him or her to pursue activities in the paid
workforce (see Nasser v. Mayer-Nasser (2000), 5
R.F.L. (5th) 100 (Ont. C.A.); Panara v. Di Ascenzo,
2005 ABCA 47, 361 A.R. 382, at para. 27).

(b) Economic Integration

[92] Another group of factors, related to those in
the first group, concerns the degree of economic
interdependence and integration that characterized
the parties’ relationship (Birmingham; Pettkus;
Nasser). The more extensive the integration of
the couple’s finances, economic interests and eco-
nomic well-being, the more likely it is that they
should be considered as having been engaged in a
joint family venture. For example, the existence of
a joint bank account that was used as a “common
purse”, as well as the fact that the family farm was
operated by the family unit, were key factors in
Dickson J.’s analysis in Rathwell. The sharing of
expenses and the amassing of a common pool of
savings may also be relevant considerations (see
Wilson; Panara).

[93] The parties’ conduct may further indicate
a sense of collectivity, mutuality, and prioritiza-
tion of the overall welfare of the family unit over
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


the individual interests of the individual members
(McCamus, at p. 366). These and other factors may
indicate that the economic well-being and lives of
the parties are largely integrated (see, e.g., Pettkus,
at p. 850).

(c) Actual Intent




[94] Underpinning the law of unjust enrichment
is an appropriate concern for the autonomy of the
parties, and this is a particularly important consid-
eration in relation to domestic partnerships. While
domestic partners might not marry for a host of
reasons, one of them may be the deliberate choice
not to have their lives economically intertwined.
Thus, in considering whether there is a joint family
venture, the actual intentions of the parties must
be given considerable weight. Those intentions
may have been expressed by the parties or may be
inferred from their conduct. The important point,
however, is that the quest is for their actual intent
as expressed or inferred, not for what in the court’s
view “reasonable” parties ought to have intended
in the same circumstances. Courts must be vigilant
not to impose their own views, under the guise of
inferred intent, in order to reach a certain result.

[95] Courts may infer from the parties’ conduct
that they intended to share in the wealth they jointly
created (P. Parkinson, “Beyond Pettkus v. Becker:
Quantifying Relief for Unjust Enrichment” (1993),
43 U.T.L.J. 217, at p. 245). The conduct of the par-
ties may show that they intended the domestic and
professional spheres of their lives to be part of a
larger, common venture (Pettkus; Peter; Sorochan).
In some cases, courts have explicitly labelled the
relationship as a “partnership” in the social and
economic sense (Panara, at para. 71; McDougall,
at para. 14). Similarly, the intention to engage in a
joint family venture may be inferred where the par-
ties accepted that their relationship was “equivalent
to marriage” (Birmingham, at para. 1), or where the
parties held themselves out to the public as married
(Sorochan). The stability of the relationship may
be a relevant factor as may the length of cohabita-
tion (Nasser; Sorochan; Birmingham). When par-
ties have lived together in a stable relationship for
318


a lengthy period, it may be nearly impossible to
engage in a precise weighing of the benefits con-
ferred within the relationship (McDougall; Nasser).




[96] The title to property may also reflect an
intent to share wealth, or some portion of it, equita-
bly. This may be the case where the parties are joint
tenants of property. Even where title is registered
to one of the parties, acceptance of the view that
wealth will be shared may be evident from other
aspects of the parties’ conduct. For example, there
may have been little concern with the details of
title and accounting of monies spent for household
expenses, renovations, taxes, insurance, and so on.
Plans for property distribution on death, whether
in a will or a verbal discussion, may also indicate
that the parties saw one another as domestic and
economic partners.

[97] The parties’ actual intent may also negate
the existence of a joint family venture, or support
the conclusion that particular assets were to be held
independently. Once again, it is the parties’ actual
intent, express or inferred from the evidence, that is
the relevant consideration.

(d) Priority of the Family

[98] A final category of factors to consider in
determining whether the parties were in fact
engaged in a joint family venture is whether and
to what extent they have given priority to the
family in their decision making. A relevant ques-
tion is whether there has been in some sense det-
rimental reliance on the relationship, by one or
both of the parties, for the sake of the family. As
Professor McCamus puts it, the question is whether
the parties have been “[p]roceeding on the basis
of understandings or assumptions about a shared
future which may or may not be articulated” (p.
365). The focus is on contributions to the domestic
and financial partnership, and particularly finan-
cial sacrifices made by the parties for the welfare
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


of the collective or family unit. Whether the roles
of the parties fall into the traditional wage earner/
homemaker division, or whether both parties are
employed and share domestic responsibilities, it
is frequently the case that one party relies on the
success and stability of the relationship for future
economic security, to his or her own economic det-




riment (Parkinson, at p. 243). This may occur in a
number of ways including: leaving the workforce
for a period of time to raise children; relocating for
the benefit of the other party’s career (and giving
up employment and employment-related net-
works as a result); foregoing career or educational
advancement for the benefit of the family or rela-
tionship; and accepting underemployment in order
to balance the financial and domestic needs of the
family unit.

[99] As I see it, giving priority to the family is not
associated exclusively with the actions of the more
financially dependent spouse. The spouse with the
higher income may also make financial sacrifices
(for example, foregoing a promotion for the ben-
efit of family life), which may be indicative that
the parties saw the relationship as a domestic and
financial partnership. As Professor Parkinson puts
it, the joint family venture may be identified where

[o]ne party has encouraged the other to rely to her
detriment by leaving the workforce or forgoing other
career opportunities for the sake of the relationship,
and the breakdown of the relationship leaves her in a
worse position than she would otherwise have been had
she not acted in this way to her economic detriment.
[p. 256]

(6) Summary of Quantum Meruit Versus
Constructive Trust

[100]

1.
not restricted to an award based on a fee-for-
services approach.
320


2. Where the unjust enrichment is most realisti-
cally characterized as one party retaining a
disproportionate share of assets resulting from
a joint family venture, and a monetary award
is appropriate, it should be calculated on the
basis of the share of those assets proportionate
to the claimant’s contributions.




3. To be entitled to a monetary remedy of this
nature, the claimant must show both (a) that
there was, in fact, a joint family venture, and
(b) that there is a link between his or her con-
tributions to it and the accumulation of assets
and/or wealth.
4. Whether there was a joint family venture is a
question of fact and may be assessed by having
regard to all of the relevant circumstances,
including factors relating to (a) mutual effort,
(b) economic integration, (c) actual intent and
(d) priority of the family.
F. Mutual Benefit Conferral

(1) Introduction

[101] As discussed earlier, the unjust enrichment
analysis in domestic situations is often complicated
by the fact that there has been a mutual confer-
ral of benefits; each party in almost all cases con-
fers benefits on the other: Parkinson, at p. 222. Of
course, a claimant cannot expect both to get back
something given to the defendant and retain some-
thing received from him or her: Birks, at p. 415.
The unjust enrichment analysis must take account
of this common sense proposition. How and where
in the analysis should this be done?
[102] The answer is fairly straightforward when
the essence of the unjust enrichment claim is that
one party has emerged from the relationship with
a disproportionate share of assets accumulated
through their joint efforts. These are the cases of
a joint family venture in which the mutual efforts
of the parties have resulted in an accumulation
of wealth. The remedy is a share of that wealth
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


proportionate to the claimant’s contributions. Once
the claimant has established his or her contribu-
tion to a joint family venture, and a link between
that contribution and the accumulation of wealth,
the respective contributions of the parties are taken
into account in determining the claimant’s propor-
tionate share. While determining the proportionate




contributions of the parties is not an exact science,
it generally does not call for a minute examination
of the give and take of daily life. It calls, rather, for
the reasoned exercise of judgment in light of all of
the evidence.

[103] Mutual benefit conferral, however, gives
rise to more practical problems in an unjust enrich-
ment claim where the appropriate remedy is a
money award based on a fee-for-services-provided
approach. The fact that the defendant has also
provided services to the claimant may be seen as
a factor relevant at all stages of the unjust enrich-
ment analysis. Some courts have considered ben-
efits received by the claimant as part of the ben-
efit/detriment analysis (for example, at the Court
of Appeal in Peter v. Beblow (1990), 50 B.C.L.R.
(2d) 266). Others have looked at mutual benefits as
an aspect of the juristic reason inquiry (for exam-
ple, Ford v. Werden (1996), 27 B.C.L.R. (3d) 169
(C.A.), and the Court of Appeal judgment in Kerr).
Still others have looked at mutual benefits in rela-
tion to both juristic reason and at the remedy stage
(for example, as proposed in Wilson). It is apparent
that some clarity and consistency is necessary with
respect to this issue.

[104] In my view, there is much to be said about
the approach to the mutual benefit analysis mapped
out by Huddart J.A. in Wilson. Specifically, I would
adopt her conclusions that mutual enrichments
should mainly be considered at the defence and
remedy stages, but that they may be considered at
the juristic reason stage to the extent that the provi-
sion of reciprocal benefits constitutes relevant evi-
dence of the existence (or non-existence) of juristic
reason for the enrichment (para. 9). This approach
is consistent with the authorities from this Court,
322


and provides a straightforward and just method of
ensuring that mutual benefit conferral is fully taken
into account without short-circuiting the proper
unjust enrichment analysis. I will briefly set out
why, in my view, this approach is sound.




[105] At the outset, however, I should say that this
Court’s decision in Peter does not mandate con-
sideration of mutual benefits at the juristic reason
stage of the analysis: see, e.g., Ford, at para. 14;
Thomas v. Fenton, 2006 BCCA 299, 269 D.L.R.
(4th) 376, at para. 18. Rather, Peter made clear
that mutual benefit conferral should generally not
be considered at the benefit and detriment stages;
the Court also approved the trial judge’s decision
to take mutual benefits into account at the remedy
stage of the unjust enrichment analysis.
[106] In Peter, the trial judge found that all three
elements of unjust enrichment had been established.
Before Ms. Peter and Mr. Beblow started living
together, he had a housekeeper whom he paid $350
per month. When Ms. Peter moved in with her chil-
dren and assumed the housekeeping and child-care
responsibilities, the housekeeper was no longer
required. The trial judge valued Ms. Peter’s con-
tribution by starting with the amount Mr. Beblow
had paid his housekeeper, but then discounting this
figure by one half to reflect the benefits Ms. Peter
received in return. The trial judge then used that
discounted figure to value Ms. Peter’s services over
the 12 years of the relationship: [1988] B.C.J. No.
887 (QL).
[107] The Court of Appeal, at (1990), 50 B.C.L.R.
(2d) 266, set aside the judge’s finding on the basis
that Ms. Peter had failed to establish that she had
suffered a deprivation corresponding to the bene-
fits she had conferred on Mr. Beblow. The court
reasoned that, although she had performed the ser-
vices of a housekeeper and homemaker, she had
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


received compensation because she and her chil-
dren lived in Mr. Beblow’s home rent free and he
contributed more for groceries than she had.

[108] This Court reversed the Court of Appeal
and restored the trial judge’s award. The Court




was unanimous that Ms. Peter had established
all of the elements of unjust enrichment, includ-
ing deprivation. Cory J. (with whom McLachlin
J. agreed on this point) made short work of Mr.
Beblow’s submission that Ms. Peter had not shown
deprivation. He observed, “As a general rule, if it
is found that the defendant has been enriched by
the efforts of the plaintiff there will, almost as a
matter of course be deprivation suffered by the
plaintiff”: at p. 1013. The Court also unanimously
upheld the trial judge’s approach of taking account
of the benefits Ms. Peter had received at the remedy
stage of his decision. As noted, the trial judge had
reduced the monthly amount used to calculate
Ms. Peter’s award by 50 percent to reflect benefits
she had received from Mr. Beblow. McLachlin J.
did not disagree with this approach, holding at p.
1003 that the figure arrived at by the judge fairly
reflected the value of Ms. Peter’s contribution to
the family assets. Cory J., at p. 1025, referred to
the trial judge’s approach as “a fair means of calcu-
lating the amount due to the appellant”. Thus, the
Court approved the approach of taking the mutual
benefit issue into account at the remedy stage of
the analysis. Peter therefore does not support the
view that mutual benefits should be considered at
the benefit/detriment or juristic reason stages of the
analysis.

(2) The Correct Approach

[109] As I noted earlier, my view is that mutual
benefit conferral can be taken into account at the
juristic reason stage of the analysis, but only to
the extent that it provides relevant evidence of the
existence of a juristic reason for the enrichment.
Otherwise, the mutual exchange of benefits should
324


be taken into account at the defence and/or remedy
stage. It is important to note that this can, and
should, take place whether or not the defendant has
made a formal counterclaim or pleaded set-off.

[110] I turn first to why mutual benefits should
not be addressed at the benefit/detriment stage of




the analysis. In my view, refusing to address mutual
benefits at that point is consistent with the quan-
tum meruit origins of the fee-for-services approach
and, as well, with the straightforward economic
approach to the benefit/detriment analysis which
has been consistently followed by this Court.

[111] An unjust enrichment claim based on a fee-
for-services approach is analogous to the traditional
claim for quantum meruit. In quantum meruit
claims, the fact that some benefit had flowed from
the defendant to the claimant is taken into account
by reducing the claimant’s recovery by the amount
of the countervailing benefit provided. For exam-
ple, in a quantum meruit claim where the plaintiff
is seeking to recover money paid pursuant to an
unenforceable contract, but received some benefit
from the defendant already, the claim will succeed
but the award will be reduced by an amount cor-
responding to the value of that benefit: Maddaugh
and McCamus (loose-leaf ed.), vol. II, at §13:200.
The authors offer as an example Giles v. McEwan
(1896), 11 Man. R. 150 (Q.B. en banc). In that case,
two employees recovered in quantum meruit for
services provided to the defendant under an unen-
forceable agreement, but the amount of the award
was reduced to reflect the value of benefits the
defendant had provided to them. Thus, taking the
benefits conferred by the defendant into account at
the remedy stage is consistent with general prin-
ciples of quantum meruit claims. Of course, if
the defendant has pleaded a counterclaim or set-
off, the mutual benefit issue must be resolved
in the course of considering that defence or
claim.
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


[112] Refusing to take mutual benefits into
account at the benefit/detriment stage is also sup-
ported by a straightforward economic approach to
the benefit/detriment analysis which the Court has
consistently followed. Garland is a good example.
The class action plaintiffs claimed in unjust enrich-
ment to seek restitution for late payment penalties




that had been imposed but that this Court (in an
earlier decision) found had been charged at a crimi-
nal rate of interest: see Garland v. Consumers’ Gas
Co., [1998] 3 S.C.R. 112. The company argued that
it had not been enriched because its rates were set
by a regulatory mechanism out of its control, and
that the rates charged would have been even higher
had the company not received the late payment
penalties as part of its revenues. That argument was
accepted by the Court of Appeal, but rejected on
the further appeal to this Court. Iacobucci J., for
the Court, held that the payment of money, under
the “straightforward economic approach” adopted
in Peter, was a benefit: para. 32. He stated at para.
36: “There simply is no doubt that Consumers’ Gas
received the monies represented by the [late pay-
ment penalties] and had that money available for
use in the carrying on of its business. . . . We are
not, at this stage, concerned with what happened to
this benefit in the ongoing operation of the regula-
tory scheme.” The Court held that the company was
in fact asserting the “change of position” defence
(that is, the defence that is available when “an inno-
cent defendant demonstrates that it has materially
changed its position as a result of an enrichment
such that it would be inequitable to require the ben-
efit to be returned”: para. 63). This defence is con-
sidered only after the three elements of an unjust
enrichment claim have been established: para.
37. Thus the Court declined to get into a detailed
consideration at the benefit/detriment stage of the
defendant’s submissions that it had not benefitted
because of the regulatory scheme.
[113] While Garland dealt with the payment of
money, my view is that the same approach should
be applied where the alleged enrichment consists
326


of services. Provided that they confer a tangible
benefit on the defendant, the services will gener-
ally constitute an enrichment and a corresponding
deprivation. Whether the deprivation was counter-
balanced by benefits flowing to the claimant from
the defendant should not be addressed at the first
two steps of the analysis. I turn now to the limited




role that mutual benefit conferral may have at the
juristic reason stage of the analysis.
[114] As previously set out, juristic reason is
the third of three parts to the unjust enrichment
analysis. As McLachlin J. put it in Peter, at p. 990,
“It is at this stage that the court must consider
whether the enrichment and detriment, morally
neutral in themselves, are ‘unjust’.” The juristic
reason analysis is intended to reveal whether there
is a reason for the defendant to retain the enrich-
ment, not to determine its value or whether the
enrichment should be set off against reciprocal
benefits: Wilson, at para. 30. Garland established
that claimants must show that there is no juristic
reason falling within any of the established catego-
ries, such as whether the benefit was a gift or pur-
suant to a legal obligation. If that is established, it is
open to the defendant to show that a different juris-
tic reason for the enrichment should be recognized,
having regard to the parties’ reasonable expecta-
tions and public policy considerations.
[115] The fact that the parties have conferred ben-
efits on each other may provide relevant evidence
of their reasonable expectations, a subject that may
become germane when the defendant attempts to
show that those expectations support the existence
of a juristic reason outside the settled categories.
However, given that the purpose of the juristic
reason step in the analysis is to determine whether
the enrichment was just, not its extent, mutual ben-
efit conferral should only be considered at the juris-
tic reason stage for that limited purpose.
(3) Summary
[116] I conclude that mutual benefits may be
considered at the juristic reason stage, but only to
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


the extent that they provide evidence relevant to
the parties’ reasonable expectations. Otherwise,
mutual benefit conferrals are to be considered at
the defence and/or remedy stage. I will have more
to say in the next section about how mutual benefit
conferral and the parties’ reasonable expectations
may come into play in the juristic reason analysis.





G. Reasonable or Legitimate Expectations

[117] The final point that requires some clari-
fication relates to the role of the parties’ reason-
able expectations in the domestic context. My con-
clusion is that, while in the early domestic unjust
enrichment cases the parties’ reasonable expecta-
tions played an important role in the juristic reason
analysis, the development of the law, and particu-
larly the Court’s judgment in Garland, has led to
a more limited and clearly circumscribed role for
those expectations.

[118] In the early cases of domestic unjust enrich-
ment claims, the reasonable expectations of the
claimant and the defendant’s knowledge of those
expectations were central to the juristic reason
analysis. For example, in Pettkus, when Dickson
J. came to the juristic reason step in the analysis,
he said that “where one person in a relationship
tantamount to spousal prejudices herself in the
reasonable expectation of receiving an interest in
property and the other person in the relationship
freely accepts benefits conferred by the first person
in circumstances where he knows or ought to have
known of that reasonable expectation, it would be
unjust to allow the recipient of the benefit to retain
it” (p. 849). Similarly, in Sorochan, at p. 46, pre-
cisely the same reasoning was invoked to show that
there was no juristic reason for the enrichment.

[119] In these cases, central to the Court’s con-
cern was whether it was just to require the defend-
ant to pay — in fact to surrender an interest in
property — for services not expressly requested.
The Court’s answer was that it would indeed be
unjust for the defendant to retain the benefits, given
328


that he had continued to accept the services when
he knew or ought to have known that the claimant
was providing them with the reasonable expecta-
tion of reward.

[120] The Court’s resort to reasonable expecta-




tions and the defendant’s knowledge of them in
these cases is analogous to the “free acceptance”
principle. The notion of free acceptance has been
invoked to extend restitutionary recovery beyond
the traditional sorts of quantum meruit claims in
which services had either been requested or pro-
vided under an unenforceable agreement. The
law’s traditional reluctance to provide a remedy
for claims where no request was made was based
on the tenet that a person should generally not
be required, in effect, to pay for services that he
or she did not request, and perhaps did not want.
However, this concern carries much less weight
when the person receiving the services knew that
they were being provided, had no reasonable belief
that they were a gift, and yet continued to freely
accept them: see P. Birks, Unjust Enrichment (2nd
ed. 2005), at pp. 56-57.

[121] The need to engage in this analysis of the
claimant’s reasonable expectations and the defend-
ant’s knowledge thereof with respect to domestic
services has, in my view, now been overtaken by
developments in the law. Garland, as noted, man-
dated a two-step approach to the juristic reason
analysis. The first step requires the claimant to
show that the benefit was not conferred for any
existing category of juristic reasons. Significantly,
the fact that the defendant also provided services
to the claimant is not one of the existing catego-
ries. Nor is the fact that the services were pro-
vided pursuant to the parties’ reasonable expecta-
tions. However, the fact that the parties reasonably
expected the services to be provided might afford
relevant evidence in relation to whether the case
falls within one of the traditional categories, for
example a contract or gift. Other than in that way,
mutual benefit conferral and the parties’ reasonable
expectations have a very limited role to play at the
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


first step in the juristic reason analysis set out in
Garland.

[122] However, different considerations arise
at the second step. Following Peter and Garland,




the parties’ reasonable or legitimate expectations
have a critical role to play when the defendant
seeks to establish a new juristic reason, whether
case-specific or categorical. As Iacobucci J. put it
in Garland, this introduces a category of residual
situations in which “courts can look to all of the
circumstances of the transaction in order to deter-
mine whether there is another reason to deny recov-
ery” (para. 45). Specifically, it is here that the court
should consider the parties’ reasonable expecta-
tions and questions of policy.

[123] It will be helpful in understanding how
Peter and Garland fit together to apply the Garland
approach to an issue touched on, but not resolved,
in Peter. In Peter, an issue was whether a claim
based on the provision of domestic services could
be defeated on the basis that the services had been
provided as part of the bargain between the par-
ties in deciding to live together. While the Court
concluded that the claim failed on the facts, it did
not hold that such a claim would inevitably fail in
all circumstances: p. 991. It seems to me that, in
light of Garland, where a “bargain” which does not
constitute a binding contract is alleged, the issue
will be considered at the stage when the defend-
ant seeks to show that there is a juristic reason for
the enrichment that does not fall within any of the
existing categories; the claim is that the “bargain”
represents the parties’ reasonable expectations,
and evidence about their reasonable expectations
would be relevant evidence of the existence (or not)
of such a bargain.

[124]

1.
tions have little role to play in deciding whether
330


the services were provided for a juristic reason
within the existing categories.

2. In some cases, the fact that mutual benefits
were conferred or that the benefits were
provided pursuant to the parties’ reason-




able expectations may be relevant evidence
of whether one of the existing categories of
juristic reasons is present. An example might
be whether there was a contract for the provi-
sion of the benefits. However, generally the
existence of mutual benefits flowing from the
defendant to the claimant will not be consid-
ered at the juristic reason stage of the analysis.

3. The parties’ reasonable or legitimate expecta-
tions have a role to play at the second step of
the juristic reason analysis, that is, where the
defendant bears the burden of establishing that
there is a juristic reason for retaining the benefit
which does not fall within the existing catego-
ries. It is the mutual or legitimate expectations
of both parties that must be considered, and not
simply the expectations of either the claimant
or the defendant. The question is whether the
parties’ expectations show that retention of the
benefits is just.

[125]

IV. The Vanasse Appeal

A. Introduction

[126] In the Vanasse appeal, the main issue
is how to quantify a monetary award for unjust
enrichment. The trial judge awarded a share of
the net increase in the family’s wealth during the
period of unjust enrichment. The Court of Appeal
held that this was the wrong approach, finding that
the trial judge ought to have performed a quan-
tum meruit calculation in which the value that each
party received from the other was assessed and set
off. This required an evaluation of the defendant
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


Mr. Seguin’s non-financial contributions to the rela-
tionship which, in the view of the Court of Appeal,
the trial judge failed to perform. As the record did
not permit the court to apply the correct legal prin-
ciples to the facts, it ordered a new hearing with
respect to compensation and consequential changes
to spousal support.





[127] In this Court, the appellant Ms. Vanasse
raises two issues:

1.
strict quantum meruit (i.e. “value received”)
approach to quantify the monetary award for
unjust enrichment?

2. Did the Court of Appeal err in finding that
the trial judge had failed to consider relevant
evidence of Mr. Seguin’s contributions?

[128] In my view, the appeal should be allowed
and the trial judge’s order restored. For the reasons I
have developed above, my view is that money com-
pensation for unjust enrichment need not always,
as a matter of principle, be calculated on a quan-
tum meruit basis. The trial judge here, although
not labelling it as such, found that there was a joint
family venture and that there was a link between
Ms. Vanasse’s contribution to it and the substantial
accumulation of wealth which the family achieved.
In my view, the trial judge made a reasonable
assessment of the monetary award appropriate to
reverse this unjust enrichment, taking due account
of Mr. Seguin’s undoubted and substantial contri-
butions.

B. Brief Overview of the Facts and Proceedings

[129] The background facts of this case are
largely undisputed. The parties lived together in
332


a common law relationship for approximately 12
years, from 1993 until March 2005. Together, they
had two children who were aged 8 and 10 at the
time of trial.

[130] During approximately the first four years
of their relationship (1993 to 1997), the parties




diligently pursued their respective careers, Ms.
Vanasse with the Canadian Security Intelligence
Service (“CSIS”) and Mr. Seguin with Fastlane
Technologies Inc., marketing a network operating
system he had developed.

[131] In March of 1997, Ms. Vanasse took a leave
of absence to move with Mr. Seguin to Halifax,
where Fastlane had relocated for important busi-
ness reasons. During the next three and one-half
years, the parties had two children; Ms. Vanasse
took care of the domestic labour, while Mr. Seguin
devoted himself to developing Fastlane. The family
moved back to Ottawa in 1998, where Mr. Seguin
purchased a home and registered it in the names of
both parties as joint tenants. In September 2000,
Fastlane was sold and Mr. Seguin netted approxi-
mately $11 million. He placed the funds in a hold-
ing company, with which he continued to develop
business and investment opportunities.

[132] After the sale of Fastlane, Ms. Vanasse con-
tinued to assume most of the domestic responsibil-
ities, although Mr. Seguin was more available to
assist. He continued to manage the finances.

[133] The parties separated on March 27, 2005.
At that time, they were in starkly contrasting finan-
cial positions: Ms. Vanasse’s net worth had gone
from about $40,000 at the time she and Mr. Seguin
started living together, to about $332,000 at the
time of separation; Mr. Seguin had come into the
relationship with about $94,000, and his net worth
at the time of separation was about $8,450,000.

[134] Ms. Vanasse brought proceedings in the
Superior Court of Justice. In addition to seeking
orders with respect to spousal support and child
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


custody, Ms. Vanasse claimed unjust enrichment.
She argued that Mr. Seguin had been unjustly
enriched because he retained virtually all of the
funds from the sale of Fastlane, even though she
had contributed to their acquisition through ben-
efits she conferred in the form of domestic and
childcare services. She alleged her contributions




allowed Mr. Seguin to dedicate most of his time
and energy to Fastlane. She sought relief by way
of constructive trust in Mr. Seguin’s remaining
one half interest in the family home, and a one-
half interest in the investment assets held by Mr.
Seguin’s holding company.

[135] Mr. Seguin contested the unjust enrich-
ment claim. While conceding he had been enriched
during the roughly three-year period where he
was working outside the home full time and Ms.
Vanasse was working at home full time (May 1997
to September 2000), he argued there was no cor-
responding deprivation because he had given her a
one-half interest in the family home and approxi-
mately $44,000 in Registered Retirement Savings
Plans (“RRSPs”). In the alternative, Mr. Seguin
submitted that a constructive trust remedy was
inappropriate because there was no link between
Ms. Vanasse’s contributions and the property of
Fastlane.

[136] The trial judge, Blishen J., concluded that
the relationship of the parties could be divided into
three distinct periods: (1) From the commencement
of cohabitation in 1993 until March 1997 when
Ms. Vanasse left her job at CSIS; (2) From March
1997 to September 2000, during which both chil-
dren were born and Fastlane was sold; and (3) From
September 2000 to the separation of the parties in
March 2005. She concluded that neither party had
been unjustly enriched in the first or third periods;
she held that their contributions to the relationship
during these periods had been proportionate. In the
first period, there were no children of the relation-
ship and both parties were focused on their careers;
in the third period, both parents were home and
their contributions had been proportionate.
334


[137] In the second period, however, the trial
judge concluded that Mr. Seguin had been unjustly
enriched by Ms. Vanasse. Ms. Vanasse had been
in charge of the domestic side of the household,
including caring for their two children. She had not
been a “nanny/housekeeper” and, as the trial judge
held, throughout the relationship she had been at




least “an equal contributor to the family enterprise”.
The trial judge concluded that Ms. Vanasse’s con-
tributions during this second period “significantly
benefited Mr. Seguin and were not proportional”
(para. 139).

[138] The trial judge found as a fact that Ms.
Vanasse’s efforts during this second period were
directly linked to Mr. Seguin’s business success.
She stated, at para. 91, that

Mr. Seguin was enriched by Ms. Vanasse’s running of
the household, providing child care for two young chil-
dren and looking after all the necessary appointments
and needs of the children. Mr. Seguin could not have
made the efforts he did to build up the company but
for Ms. Vanasse’s assumption of these responsibilities.
Mr. Seguin reaped the benefits of Ms. Vanasse’s efforts
by being able to focus his time, energy and efforts on
Fastlane. [Emphasis added.]

Again at para. 137, the trial judge found that

Mr. Seguin was unjustly enriched and Ms. Vanasse
deprived for three and one-half years of their relation-
ship, during which time Mr. Seguin often worked day
and night and traveled frequently while in Halifax.
Mr. Seguin could not have succeeded, as he did, and
built up the company, as he did, without Ms. Vanasse
assuming the vast majority of childcare and household
responsibilities. Mr. Seguin could not have devoted his
time to Fastlane but for Ms. Vanasse’s assumption of
those responsibilities. . . . Mr. Seguin reaped the benefit
of Ms. Vanasse’s efforts by being able to focus all of his
considerable energies and talents on making Fastlane a
success. [Emphasis added.]
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


[139] The trial judge concluded that a monetary
award in this case was appropriate, given Mr.
Seguin’s ability to pay, and lack of a sufficiently
direct and substantial link between Ms. Vanasse’s
contributions and Fastlane or Mr. Seguin’s holding
company, as required to impose a remedial con-
structive trust.





[140] With respect to quantification, Blishen J.
noted that Ms. Vanasse had received a one-half
interest in the family home, but concluded that this
was not adequate compensation for her contribu-
tions. The trial judge compared the net worths of the
parties and determined that Ms. Vanasse was enti-
tled to a one-half interest in the prorated increase
in Mr. Seguin’s net worth during the period of the
unjust enrichment. She reasoned that his net worth
had increased by about $8.4 million dollars over
the 12 years of the relationship. Although she noted
that the most significant increase took place when
Fastlane was sold towards the end of the period
of unjust enrichment, she nonetheless prorated
the increase over the full 12 years of the relation-
ship, yielding a figure of about $700,000 per year.
Starting with the $2.45 million increase attributa-
ble to the three and one-half years of unjust enrich-
ment, the trial judge awarded Ms. Vanasse 50 per-
cent of that amount, less the value of her interest in
the family home and her RRSPs. This produced an
award of just under $1 million.

[141] Mr. Seguin did not appeal Blishen J.’s unjust
enrichment finding, and conceded unjust enrich-
ment between 1997 and 2000 on appeal. Therefore,
the trial judge’s findings that there had been an
unjust enrichment during that period and that there
was no unjust enrichment during the other periods
are not in issue. The sole issue for determination in
this Court is the propriety of the trial judge’s mon-
etary award for the unjust enrichment which she
found to have occurred.
336


C. Analysis

(1) Was the Trial Judge Required to Use a
Quantum Meruit Approach to Calculate
the Monetary Award?




[142] I agree with the appellant that a monetary
award for unjust enrichment need not, as a matter
of principle, always be calculated on a fee-for-
services basis. As I have set out earlier, an unjust
enrichment is best characterized as one party leav-
ing the relationship with a disproportionate share of
wealth that accumulated as a result of the parties’
joint efforts. This will be so when the parties were
engaged in a joint family venture and where there
is a link between the contributions of the claim-
ant and the accumulation of wealth. When this is
the case, the amount of the enrichment should be
assessed by determining the claimant’s proportion-
ate contribution to that accumulated wealth. As the
trial judge saw it, this was exactly the situation of
Ms. Vanasse and Mr. Seguin.

(2) Existence of a Joint Family Venture

[143] The trial judge, after a six-day trial, con-
cluded that “Ms. Vanasse was not a nanny/house-
keeper”. She found that Ms. Vanasse had been at
least “an equal contributor to the family enterprise”
throughout the relationship and that, during the
period of unjust enrichment, her contributions “sig-
nificantly benefited Mr. Seguin” (para. 139).

[144] The trial judge, of course, did not review the
evidence under the headings that I have suggested
will be helpful in identifying a joint family ven-
ture, namely “mutual effort”, “economic integra-
tion”, “actual intent” and “priority of the family”.
However, her findings of fact and analysis indicate
that the unjust enrichment of Mr. Seguin at the
expense of Ms. Vanasse ought to be characterized
as the retention by Mr. Seguin of a disproportionate
share of the wealth generated from a joint family
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


venture. The judge’s findings fit conveniently
under the headings I have suggested.

(a) Mutual Effort

[145] There are several factors in this case which
suggest that, throughout their relationship, the par-




ties were working collaboratively towards common
goals. First, as previously mentioned, the trial judge
found that Ms. Vanasse’s role was not as a “nanny/
housekeeper” but rather as at least an equal contrib-
utor throughout the relationship. The parties made
important decisions keeping the overall welfare of
the family at the forefront: the decision to move to
Halifax, the decision to move back to Ottawa, and
the decision that Ms. Vanasse would not return to
work after the sale of Fastlane are all clear exam-
ples. The parties pooled their efforts for the benefit
of their family unit. As the trial judge found, during
the second stage of their relationship from March
1997 to September 2000, the division of labour
was such that Ms. Vanasse was almost entirely
responsible for running the home and caring for
the children, while Mr. Seguin worked long hours
and managed the family finances. The trial judge
found that it was through their joint efforts that
they were able to raise a young family and acquire
wealth. As she put it, “Mr. Seguin could not have
made the efforts he did to build up the company but
for Ms. Vanasse’s assumption of these responsibili-
ties” (para. 91). While Mr. Seguin’s long hours and
extensive travel reduced somewhat in September
1998 when the parties returned to Ottawa, the basic
division of labour remained the same.

[146] Notably, the period of unjust enrichment
corresponds to the time during which the parties
had two children together (in 1997 and 1999), a fur-
ther indicator that they were working together to
achieve common goals. The length of the relation-
ship is also relevant, and their 12-year cohabita-
tion is a significant period of time. Finally, the trial
338


judge described the arrangement between the par-
ties as a “family enterprise”, to which Ms. Vanasse
was “at least, an equal contributor” (paras. 138-39).

(b) Economic Integration




[147] The trial judge found that “[t]his was not
a situation of economic interdependence” (para.
105). That said, there was a pooling of resources.
Ms. Vanasse was not employed and did not contrib-
ute financially to the family after the children were
born, and thus was financially dependent on Mr.
Seguin. The family home was registered jointly,
and the parties had a joint chequing account. As the
trial judge put it, “She was ‘the C.E.O. of the kids’
and he was ‘the C.E.O. of the finances’” (para. 105).

(c) Actual Intent

[148] The actual intent of the parties in a domes-
tic relationship, as expressed by the parties or
inferred from their conduct, must be given consid-
erable weight in determining whether there was a
joint family venture. There are a number of find-
ings of fact that indicate these parties considered
their relationship to be a joint family venture.

[149] While a promise to marry or the discus-
sion of legal marriage is by no means a prerequi-
site for the identification of a joint family venture,
in this case the parties’ intentions with respect to
marriage strongly suggest that they viewed them-
selves as the equivalent of a married couple. Mr.
Seguin proposed to Ms. Vanasse in July 1996 and
they exchanged rings. While they were “devoted to
one another and still in love”, a wedding date was
never set (para. 14). Mr. Seguin raised the topic of
marriage again when Ms. Vanasse found out she
was pregnant with their first child. Although they
never married, the trial judge found that there had
been “mutual expectations [of marriage] during the
first few years of their 12 year relationship” (para.
64). Mr. Seguin continued to address Ms. Vanasse
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


as “my future wife”, and she was viewed by the out-
side world as such (para. 33).

[150] The trial judge also referred to statements




made by Mr. Seguin that were strongly indicative
of his view that there was a joint family venture.
As the trial judge put it, at para. 28, upon the sale
of Fastlane
Mr. Seguin became a wealthy man. He told Ms. Vanasse
that they would never have to worry about finances as
their parents did; their children could go to the best
schools and they could live a good life without finan-
cial concerns.

Again, at para. 98:
After the sale of the company, Mr. Seguin indicated they
could retire, the children could go to the best schools
and the family would be well cared for. The family took
travel vacations, enjoyed luxury cars, bought a large
cabin cruiser which they used for summer vacations
and purchased condominiums at Mont-Tremblant.

[151] While the trial judge viewed Mr. Seguin’s
promises and reassurances as contributing to a rea-
sonable expectation on the part of Ms. Vanasse that
she was to share in the increase of his net worth
during the period of unjust enrichment, in my view
these comments are more appropriately character-
ized as a reflection of the reality that there was a
joint family venture, to which the couple jointly
contributed for their mutual benefit and the benefit
of their children.

(d) Priority of the Family

[152] There is a strong inference from the fac-
tual findings that, to Mr. Seguin’s knowledge, Ms.
Vanasse relied on the relationship to her detriment.
As the trial judge found, in 1997 Ms. Vanasse gave
up a lucrative and exciting career with CSIS, where
she was training to be an intelligence officer, to
move to Halifax with Mr. Seguin. In many ways
this was a sacrifice on her part; she left her career,
340


gave up her own income, and moved away from
her family and friends. Mr. Seguin had moved to
Halifax in order to relocate Fastlane for business
reasons. Ms. Vanasse then stayed home and cared
for their two small children. As I have already
explained, during the period of the unjust enrich-
ment, Ms. Vanasse was responsible for a dispropor-




tionate share of the domestic labour. It was these
domestic contributions that, in part, permitted Mr.
Seguin to focus on his work with Fastlane. Later, in
2003, the “family’s decision” was for Ms. Vanasse
to remain home after her leave from CSIS had
expired (para. 198). Ms. Vanasse’s financial posi-
tion at the breakdown of the relationship indicates
she relied on the relationship to her economic det-
riment. This is all evidence supporting the conclu-
sion that the parties were, in fact, operating as a
joint family venture.

[153] As a final point, I would refer to the argu-
ments made by Mr. Seguin, which were accepted
by the Court of Appeal, that the trial judge failed to
give adequate weight to sacrifices Mr. Seguin made
for the benefit of the relationship. Later in my rea-
sons, I will address the question of whether the trial
judge actually failed in this regard. However, the
points raised by Mr. Seguin to support this argu-
ment actually serve to reinforce the conclusion that
there was a joint family venture. Mr. Seguin specifi-
cally notes a number of factors, including: agree-
ing to step down as CEO of Fastlane in September
1997 to make himself more available to Ms.
Vanasse, causing friction with his co-workers and
partners, and reducing his remuneration; agree-
ing to relocate to Ottawa at Ms. Vanasse’s request
in 1998; and making increased efforts to work at
home more and travel less after moving back to
Ottawa. These facts are indicative of the sense of
mutuality in the parties’ social and financial rela-
tionship. In short, they support the identification of
a joint family venture.
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


(e) Conclusion on Identification of the Joint
Family Venture

[154] In my view, the trial judge’s findings of
fact clearly show that Ms. Vanasse and Mr. Seguin
engaged in a joint family venture. The remaining
question is whether there was a link between Ms.




Vanasse’s contributions to it and the accumulation
of wealth.

(3) Link to Accumulation of Wealth

[155] The trial judge made a clear finding that
there was a link between Ms. Vanasse’s contribu-
tions and the family’s accumulation of wealth.

[156] I have referred earlier, in some detail, to
the trial judge’s findings in this regard. However,
to repeat, her conclusion is expressed particularly
clearly at para. 91 of her reasons:
Mr. Seguin could not have made the efforts he did to
build up the company but for Ms. Vanasse’s assumption
of these [household and child-rearing] responsibilities.
Mr. Seguin reaped the benefits of Ms. Vanasse’s efforts
by being able to focus his time, energy and efforts on
Fastlane.

[157] Given that and similar findings, I con-
clude that not only were these parties engaged in
a joint family venture, but that there was a clear
link between Ms. Vanasse’s contribution to it and
the accumulation of wealth. The unjust enrichment
is thus best viewed as Mr. Seguin leaving the rela-
tionship with a disproportionate share of the wealth
accumulated as a result of their joint efforts.

(4) Calculation of the Award

[158] The main focus of the appeal was on
whether the award ought to have been calculated
on a quantum meruit basis. Very little was argued
before this Court regarding the way the trial judge
approached her calculation of a proportionate share
of the parties’ accumulated wealth. I conclude that
342


the trial judge’s approach was reasonable in the
circumstances, but I stress that I do not hold out
her approach as necessarily being a template for
future cases. Within the legal principles I have out-
lined, there may be many ways in which an award
may be quantified reasonably. I prefer not to make
any more general statements about the quantifica-




tion process in the context of this appeal, except
this. Provided that the correct legal principles are
applied, and the findings of fact are not tainted by
clear and determinative error, a trial judge’s assess-
ment of damages is treated with considerable defer-
ence on appeal: see, e.g., Nance v. British Columbia
Electric Railway Co., [1951] A.C. 601 (P.C.). A
reasoned and careful exercise of judgment by the
trial judge as to the appropriate monetary award
to remedy an unjust enrichment should be treated
with the same deference. There are two final spe-
cific points that I must address.

[159] Mr. Seguin submits, very briefly, that a
proper application of the “value survived” approach
in this case would require a careful determination
of the contributions by third parties to the growth
of Fastlane during the period his own contribu-
tions were diminished, as a result of what counsel
characterizes as Ms. Vanasse’s “demands” that he
reduce his hours and move back to Ottawa. This
argument is premised on the notion that the money
he received from the sale was not justly his to
share with Ms. Vanasse. I cannot accept this prem-
ise. Unexplained is why he received more than his
share when the company was sold or why, having
received more than he was due, Ms. Vanasse is still
not entitled to an equitable share of what he actu-
ally received.

[160] Second, there is the finding of the Court
of Appeal that the trial judge failed to take into
account evidence of Mr. Seguin’s numerous and sig-
nificant non-financial contributions to the family.
I respectfully cannot accept this view. The trial
judge specifically alluded to these contributions in
her reasons. Moreover, by confining the period of
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


unjust enrichment to the three and one-half year
period, the trial judge took into account the periods
during which Ms. Vanasse’s contributions were not
disproportionate to Mr. Seguin’s. In my view, the
trial judge took a realistic and practical view of the
evidence before her and gave sufficient considera-
tion to Mr. Seguin’s contributions.





D. Disposition

[161] I would allow the appeal, set aside the order
of the Court of Appeal, and restore the order of
the trial judge. The appellant should have her costs
throughout.

V. The Kerr Appeal

A. Introduction

[162] When their common law relationship
of more than 25 years ended, Ms. Kerr sued her
former partner, Mr. Baranow, advancing claims
for unjust enrichment, resulting trust, and spousal
support. Mr. Baranow counterclaimed that Ms.
Kerr had been unjustly enriched by his housekeep-
ing services provided between 1991 and 2006,
and by his early retirement in order to provide her
personal assistance. The trial judge awarded Ms.
Kerr $315,000, holding that she was entitled to this
amount both by way of resulting trust (to reflect her
contribution to the acquisition of property) and by
way of remedial constructive trust (as a remedy for
her successful claim in unjust enrichment). He also
awarded Ms. Kerr $1,739 per month in spousal sup-
port effective the date she commenced proceedings.
Although the trial judge rejected Mr. Baranow’s
assertion that Ms. Kerr had been unjustly enriched
at his expense, the reasons for judgment and the
order after trial do not otherwise address Mr.
Baranow’s counterclaim.
344


[163] Mr. Baranow appealed. The Court of Appeal
allowed the appeal, concluding that Ms. Kerr’s
claims for a resulting trust and in unjust enrichment
should be dismissed, that Mr. Baranow’s claim for
unjust enrichment should be remitted to the trial
court for determination, and that the order for
spousal support should be effective as of the first




day of the trial, not as of the date proceedings were
commenced.
[164] Ms. Kerr appeals, submitting that the Court
of Appeal erred by setting aside the trial judge’s
findings that:
(1) a resulting trust arose in her favour;
(2) she had unjustly enriched Mr. Baranow; and
(3) spousal support should begin as of the date she
instituted proceedings.
[165] In my view, the Court of Appeal was right to
set aside the trial judge’s findings of resulting trust
and unjust enrichment. It also did not err in direct-
ing that Mr. Baranow’s counterclaim be returned to
the Supreme Court of British Columbia for hearing.
However, my view is that Ms. Kerr’s unjust enrich-
ment claim should not have been dismissed, but
rather a new trial ordered. While the trial judge’s
errors certainly were not harmless, it is not pos-
sible to say on this record, which includes findings
of fact tainted by clear error, that her unjust enrich-
ment claim would inevitably fail if analyzed using
the clarified legal framework set out above. With
respect to the commencement date of the spousal
support order, I would set aside the order of the
Court of Appeal and restore the trial judge’s order.
B. Overview of the Facts
[166] The trial judge’s disposition of both the
resulting trust and unjust enrichment claims
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


turned on his conclusion that Ms. Kerr had pro-
vided $60,000 worth of equity and assets at the
beginning of the relationship. This fact, in the
trial judge’s view, supported awarding her one-
third of the value of the home she shared with Mr.
Baranow at the time of separation. According to
the trial judge, this $60,000 of equity and assets




consisted of three elements: her $37,000 of equity
in the Coleman Street home she had shared with
her former husband; the value of an automobile;
and the value of furniture which she brought into
her relationship with Mr. Baranow. The trial judge
did not make specific findings of fact about the
value of either Ms. Kerr’s or Mr. Baranow’s non-
monetary contributions to the relationship. As pre-
viously noted, while the judge rejected in a single
sentence Mr. Baranow’s contention that Ms. Kerr
had been unjustly enriched at his expense, the
judge did not explain the basis of that conclusion.
Mr. Baranow’s counterclaim was not otherwise
addressed.

[167] The trial judge’s findings of fact, of course,
must be accepted unless tainted with clear and
determinative error. In this case, however, the
Court of Appeal’s intervention on some of the
judge’s key findings was justified, because those
findings simply were not supported by the record.
I will have to delve into the facts, more than might
otherwise be required, to explain why.

[168] The parties began to live together in Mr.
Baranow’s home on Wall Street in Vancouver in
May 1981. Shortly afterward, they moved into
Ms. Kerr’s former matrimonial home on Coleman
Street. They had met at their mutual place of work,
the Port of Vancouver, where she worked as a sec-
retary and he as a longshoreman. Ms. Kerr was in
midst of a divorce. Through her separation agree-
ment, Ms. Kerr received her husband’s interest in
their former matrimonial home on Coleman Street
in North Vancouver, all of the furniture in the
house, and a 1979 Cadillac Eldorado. However,
346


Ms. Kerr’s ex-husband owed more than $400,000
and Ms. Kerr was guarantor of some of that debt.

[169] In the summer of 1981, the Coleman Street
property was the subject of foreclosure proceed-
ings and, according to the evidence, was about to




be foreclosed on July 29, 1981. Ms. Kerr testified
at trial that, at the time, she had two teenage chil-
dren, was earning under $30,000 a year, and had no
money to save the house.

[170] Ms. Kerr instructed her lawyer to place the
titles to the Coleman Street property and the vehi-
cle into Mr. Baranow’s name. Mr. Baranow paid
$33,000 in cash to secure the property against out-
standing debts, and guaranteed a $100,000 mort-
gage at a rate of 22 percent. He then began to make
the mortgage payments and eventually refinanced
the mortgage, together with that on his Wall Street
property, and assumed that new mortgage himself.

[171] The couple lived together for the next 25
years, first in the Wall Street property, then at
Coleman Street, then in a temporary apartment,
and finally in their “dream home” which they con-
structed on Mr. Baranow’s Wall Street property.

[172] While the parties lived together in the
Coleman Street property (from September 1981 to
December 1985), Mr. Baranow retained the $450
per month he received by renting out his Wall Street
property. The trial judge found that, although the
parties kept their financial affairs separate, there
was an arrangement by which Mr. Baranow would
pay the property taxes and mortgage payments on
both the Coleman Street and the Wall Street prop-
erties. The mortgage on both properties was paid
off before July 1985. However, Mr. Baranow took
out a $32,000 mortgage on the Wall Street prop-
erty in July 1985, which was paid in full by August
1988.

[173] The Coleman Street property was sold in
August 1985 for $138,000. This sale was at a con-
siderable loss, taking into account the real estate
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


commission, the $33,000 in cash Mr. Baranow had
contributed at the time of the transfer to him, and
the mortgage payments he alone had made between
the transfer in the summer of 1981 and the sale in
the summer of 1985.

[174] The parties moved into an apartment (from




August 1985 until October 1986) while they con-
structed their “dream home” at the Wall Street
location. The existing dwelling was torn down and
replaced. Mr. Baranow spent somewhere between
$97,000 and $105,000 on its construction, with
additional amounts spent for materials, labour
and permits. Ms. Kerr, the trial judge found, was
involved with the planning, interior decorating and
cleaning. She also planted sod, tended the flower
garden, and paid for some wood paneling in the
downstairs bedroom. In addition, she made con-
tributions towards the purchase of furniture, appli-
ances, and other chattels for the Wall Street prop-
erty. Her son paid $350 per month in rent, which
Mr. Baranow retained. At one point in his reasons,
the trial judge stated that Ms. Kerr paid “all of the
household expenses and the insurance on the new
house . . . even after the $32,000.00 mortgage was
paid off by [Mr. Baranow] in August 1988” (para.
24). However, at another point, the judge noted
that Ms. Kerr paid the utilities and insurance and
bought “some groceries” (para. 36). Mr. Baranow,
he found, paid the property-related expenses, con-
sisting of property taxes (less the disability benefit
attributable to Ms. Kerr) and upkeep (which was
minimal in the new house). The trial judge found
that the current value of the Wall Street property
was $942,500, compared with $205,000 in October
of 1986. He then concluded that, given there were
no mortgage payments after 1988, Ms. Kerr’s share
of the expenses “was probably higher” than Mr.
Baranow’s for approximately 18 years before they
stopped living together.

[175] In 1991, Ms. Kerr suffered a massive stroke
and cardiac arrest, leaving her paralyzed on her left
side and unable to return to work. Her health stead-
ily deteriorated, and relations between the couple
became increasingly strained. Mr. Baranow took an
348


early retirement in 2002. The trial judge acknowl-
edged that Mr. Baranow claimed to have done this
to care for Ms. Kerr, but noted that early retirement
was also favourable to him. The trial judge found
that Mr. Baranow started to experience “caregiver
fatigue” and began exploring institutional care
alternatives in June 2005. The next summer, in




August 2006, Ms. Kerr had to undergo surgery on
her knee. After the surgery, Mr. Baranow made it
clear to the hospital staff that he was not prepared
to have her return home. Ms. Kerr was transferred
to an extended care facility where she remained at
the time of trial. The trial judge found that, in the
last 18 months Ms. Kerr resided at the Wall Street
property, Mr. Baranow did most of the housework
and helped her with her bodily functions.

C. Analysis

(1) The Resulting Trust Issue

[176] The trial judge found that Mr. Baranow held
a one-third interest in the Wall Street property by
way of resulting trust for Ms. Kerr, on three bases.
The Court of Appeal found that each of these hold-
ings was erroneous. I respectfully agree.

(a) Gratuitous Transfer

[177] The trial judge found that the transfer of
the Coleman Street property to Mr. Baranow was
gratuitous, therefore raising the presumption of a
resulting trust in Ms. Kerr’s favour. At the time
of transfer to Mr. Baranow, roughly $133,000 was
required to save the property (it was subject to a
first mortgage of just under $80,000, a second mort-
gage of just under $35,000, a judgment in favour of
the Bank of Montreal of just under $12,000, and
other miscellaneous debts and charges, adding up
to roughly $133,000). There was also a $26,500
judgment in favour of CIBC, which was of concern
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


to Ms. Kerr, although it is not listed in the payouts
required to close the transfer. We know that Ms.
Kerr had guaranteed some of her former husband’s
debts, and that she declared bankruptcy in 1983 in
relation to $15,000 of debt for which she had co-
signed with her former husband.





[178] The Court of Appeal reversed the trial
judge’s resulting trust finding, holding that the
transfer was not gratuitous. The court pointed to
the contributions and liabilities undertaken by Mr.
Baranow to make the transfer possible, and con-
cluded that the trial judge’s finding in this regard
constituted a palpable and overriding error.

[179] On this point, I respectfully agree with
the Court of Appeal. There is no dispute that Mr.
Baranow injected roughly $33,000 in cash, and
guaranteed a $100,000 mortgage, so that the prop-
erty would not be lost to the bank in the foreclosure
proceedings. This constituted consideration, and
the transfer therefore cannot reasonably be labelled
gratuitous. The respondent would have us hold oth-
erwise on the basis of technical arguments about
the lack of a precise coincidence between the time
of the transfer and payments, and the lack of pay-
ment directly to Ms. Kerr because Mr. Baranow’s
payments were made to her creditors. These argu-
ments have no merit. An important element of the
trial judge’s finding of a resulting trust was his
conclusion that there was “no evidence” that Mr.
Baranow’s payment of $33,000 in cash and his
guarantee of the $100,000 mortgage “were in con-
nection with the transfer or part of an agreement
between the parties so as to constitute considera-
tion for the transfer” (para. 76). Putting to one side
for the moment whether this finding reflects a cor-
rect understanding of a gratuitous transfer, the
judge clearly erred in making this statement; there
was in fact much evidence to that precise effect.
Mr. Baranow testified that Ms. Kerr had “tearfully
asked” Mr. Baranow for help to save the property
from the creditors. Ms. Kerr’s solicitor recorded in
his reporting letter that Ms. Kerr felt she had little
choice but to convey the property to Mr. Baranow
350


“faced with the large outstanding debts of [her]
husband which include[d] a Judgment taken by
C.I.B.C. for a debt outstanding in the amount of
$26,500.00”. At trial, Ms. Kerr was asked whether
she had requested Mr. Baranow to save the house;
she responded, “I guess so.” Thus, contrary to the
judge’s finding, there was in fact considerable evi-




dence that Mr. Baranow’s paying off of the debts
and guaranteeing the mortgage were in connec-
tion with the transfer of the property to him. This
evidence shows that he accepted the transfer and
assumed the financial obligations at Ms. Kerr’s
request, and in order to further her purpose of pre-
venting the creditors from foreclosing on the prop-
erty.

[180] The Court of Appeal was correct to inter-
vene on this point and conclude that the transfer
was not gratuitous. The trial judge’s imposition of a
resulting trust on one-third of the Wall Street prop-
erty on this basis accordingly cannot be sustained.

(b) Ms. Kerr’s Contributions

[181] The trial judge also based his finding of
resulting trust on Ms. Kerr’s financial and other
contributions to the acquisition of the new home
on the Wall Street property. He found Ms. Kerr had
contributed a total of $60,000: $37,000 in equity
from the transfer of the Coleman Street property to
Mr. Baranow; $20,000 for the value of the Cadillac
also transferred to Mr. Baranow; and $3,000 for
the furniture in the Coleman Street property. In
addition, the trial judge noted that, in obtaining
the legal title of Coleman, Mr. Baranow was able
to “re-mortgage both properties for $116,000.00
and apply the $16,000.00 toward the acquisition of
the Wall Street Property” (para. 82). Furthermore,
Mr. Baranow would not have been able to pay off
the mortgages with the same efficiency but for
Ms. Kerr’s contributions to household expenses.
However, the trial judge did not attach any value
to these last two matters in his determination of the
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


extent of the resulting trust which he imposed on
the Wall Street property.

[182] The Court of Appeal reversed this finding




as not being supported by the record. The court
noted that Ms. Kerr did not have $37,000 in equity
in the Coleman Street property when Mr. Baranow
took title, Mr. Baranow did not receive any benefi-
cial interest in the vehicle, and there was no evi-
dence of the value of the furnishings.

[183] I agree with the Court of Appeal’s disposi-
tion of this issue. As it pointed out, the evidence
showed that, in addition to Mr. Baranow paying
cash and guaranteeing a mortgage, he paid the
monthly mortgage payments, taxes and upkeep
expenses on the Coleman property until it was sold
in 1985 for $138,000 (less real estate commission).
Mr. Baranow received no beneficial interest in the
vehicle and the judge made no finding about the
value of the furnishings. There was not, in any
meaningful sense of the word, any equity in the
Coleman property for Ms. Kerr to contribute to the
acquisition or improvement of the Wall Street prop-
erty. I would affirm the conclusion of the Court of
Appeal on this point.

(c) Common Intention Resulting Trust

[184] The trial judge also appears to have based
his conclusions about the resulting trust on his
finding of a common intention on the part of Ms.
Kerr and Mr. Baranow to share in the Wall Street
property. For the reasons I have given earlier, the
“common intention” resulting trust has no further
role to play in the resolution of disputes such as this
one. I would hold that a resulting trust should not
have been imposed on the Wall Street property on
the basis of a finding of common intention between
these parties.
352


(d) Conclusion With Respect to Resulting
Trust

[185] In my view the Court of Appeal was cor-
rect to set aside the trial judge’s conclusions with
respect to the resulting trust issues.




(2) Unjust Enrichment

[186] The trial judge also found that Mr. Baranow
had been unjustly enriched by Ms. Kerr to the
extent of $315,000, the value of the one-third inter-
est in the Wall Street property determined during
the resulting trust analysis. The judge found that
Ms. Kerr had provided the following benefits to
Mr. Baranow:

a.

b. the automobile;

c.

d. $16,000 in refinancing permitted by the Cole-
man transfer and applied to the Wall Street
property;

e.
Street property;

f.
both properties;

g. spousal services such as housework, entertain-
ing guests and preparing meals until Ms. Kerr’s
disability made it impossible to continue;

h. assistance with planning and decoration of the
Wall Street house;

i.
chattels for the new home;

j.
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


k. approximately five years’ worth of rental
income from Ms. Kerr’s son.

[187] Turning to the element of correspond-
ing deprivation, the trial judge noted that it was
“unlikely” that Ms. Kerr had given up any career
or educational opportunities over the course of the




relationship. Furthermore, her income remained
unchanged, even following her stroke, due to her
receipt of disability pensions and other benefits.
The judge found that she had lived rent-free for the
entire relationship. He concluded, however, that
she had suffered a deprivation because, had she not
contributed her equity in the Coleman Street prop-
erty, it was “reasonable to infer that she would have
used it to purchase an asset in her own name, invest
for her own benefit, use it for some personal inter-
est, or otherwise avail herself of beneficial financial
opportunity”: para. 92. He also concluded, without
elaboration, that the benefits that she received from
the relationship did not overtake her contributions.

[188] The Court of Appeal set aside the trial
judge’s finding of unjust enrichment. It found that
Mr. Baranow’s direct and indirect contributions,
by which Ms. Kerr was enriched and for which he
was not compensated, constituted a juristic reason
for any enrichment which he experienced at her
expense. The court found that, for reasons men-
tioned earlier, there was no $60,000 contribution by
Ms. Kerr and therefore her claim rested on her indi-
rect contributions. The court also concluded that
the trial judge’s analysis failed to assess the extent
of Mr. Baranow’s direct and indirect contributions
to Ms. Kerr, including: his payment of accommo-
dation expenses for the duration of the relation-
ship; his contribution to the purchase price of the
van which Ms. Kerr still possesses; her receipt of
almost half of his lifetime amount of union medical
benefits, used to pay for her health care expenses;
his taking early retirement with a reduced monthly
pension to care for Ms. Kerr; and his provision of
extensive personal caregiver and domestic services
without compensation. Moreover, in the Court of
Appeal’s view, the trial judge had failed to note
that Mr. Baranow’s payment of her living expenses
354


permitted her to save about $272,000 over the
course of the relationship.
[189] The appellant challenges the Court of




Appeal’s decision on two bases. First, she argues
that the court improperly interfered with the trial
judge’s finding of fact with respect to Ms. Kerr’s
$60,000 contribution to the relationship. Second,
she submits that the court improperly considered
the question of mutual benefits through the lens of
juristic reason, and that this resulted in the court
failing to consider globally who had been enriched
and who deprived. Ms. Kerr’s submission on this
latter point is that consideration of mutual benefit
conferral should occur during the first two steps
of the unjust enrichment analysis: enrichment and
corresponding deprivation. Once that has been
established, she argues that the legitimate expecta-
tions of the parties may be considered as part of the
analysis of whether there was a juristic reason for
the enrichment. The main point is that, in the appel-
lant’s submission, it was open to the trial judge to
conclude that the parties’ legitimate expectation
was that they would accumulate wealth in propor-
tion to their respective incomes; without a share of
the value of the real property acquired during the
relationship, that reasonable expectation cannot be
realized.
[190] More fundamentally, the appellant urges
the Court to adopt what she calls the “family prop-
erty approach” to unjust enrichment. In essence,
the appellant submits that her contributions gave
rise to a reasonable expectation that she would have
an equitable share of the assets acquired during the
relationship.
[191]
(a) Findings of Fact Regarding the $60,000
Contribution
[192] As noted earlier, the Court of Appeal was
right to set aside the trial judge’s conclusion that the
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


appellant had contributed $60,000 to the couple’s
assets. There was, in no realistic sense of the word,
any “equity” to contribute from the Coleman Street
property to acquisition of the new Wall Street
“dream home”. Furthermore, the appellant retained
the beneficial use of the motor vehicle, and there
was no satisfactory evidence of the value of the fur-




niture. The judge’s findings on this point were the
product of clear and determinative error.

(b) Analysis of Offsetting Enrichments

[193] On this issue, I cannot accept the conclu-
sions of either the trial judge or the Court of Appeal.
As noted, in his determination of the extent of Ms.
Kerr’s unjust enrichment, the trial judge largely
ignored Mr. Baranow’s contributions. However, for
the reasons I have developed earlier, the Court of
Appeal erred in assessing Mr. Baranow’s contri-
butions as part of the juristic reason analysis; this
analysis prematurely truncated Ms. Kerr’s prima
facie case of unjust enrichment. I have set out the
correct approach to this issue earlier in my rea-
sons. As, in my view, there must be a new trial of
both Ms. Kerr’s unjust enrichment claim and Mr.
Baranow’s counterclaim, it is not necessary to say
anything further. The principles set out above must
accordingly be applied at the new trial of these
issues.

(c) The “Family Property Approach”

[194] I turn finally to Ms. Kerr’s more general
point that her claim should be assessed using a
“family property approach”. As set out earlier in
my reasons, for Ms. Kerr to show an entitlement
to a proportionate share of the wealth accumulated
during the relationship, she must establish that Mr.
Baranow has been unjustly enriched at her expense,
that their relationship constituted a joint family
venture, and that her contributions are linked to
the generation of wealth during the relationship.
356


She would then have to show what proportion of
the jointly accumulated wealth reflects her con-
tributions. Of course, this clarified template was
not available to the trial judge or to the Court of
Appeal. However, these requirements are quite dif-
ferent than those advanced by the appellant and
accordingly her “family property approach” must




be rejected.

(d) Disposition of the Unjust Enrichment
Appeal

[195] I conclude that the findings of the trial
judge in relation to unjust enrichment cannot
stand. The next question is whether, as the Court of
Appeal decided, Ms. Kerr’s claim for unjust enrich-
ment should be dismissed or whether it ought to
be returned for a new trial. With reluctance, I have
concluded the latter course is the more just one in
all of the circumstances.

[196] The first consideration in support of a new
trial is that the Court of Appeal directed a hearing
of Mr. Baranow’s counterclaim. Given that the trial
judge unfortunately did not address that claim in
any meaningful way, the Court of Appeal’s order
that it be heard and decided is unimpeachable.
There was evidence that Mr. Baranow made very
significant contributions to Ms. Kerr’s welfare such
that his counterclaim cannot simply be dismissed.
As I noted earlier, the trial judge also referred to
various other monetary and non-monetary contri-
butions which Ms. Kerr made to the couple’s wel-
fare and comfort, but he did not evaluate them, let
alone compare them with the contributions made
by Mr. Baranow. In these circumstances, trying
the counterclaim separately from Ms. Kerr’s claim
would be an artificial and potentially unfair way of
proceeding.

[197] More fundamentally, Ms. Kerr’s claim was
not presented, defended or considered by the courts
below pursuant to the joint family venture analysis
that I have set out. Even assuming that Ms. Kerr
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


made out her claim in unjust enrichment, it is not
possible to fairly apply the joint family venture
approach to this case on appeal, using the record
available to this Court. There are few findings of
fact relevant to the key question of whether the par-
ties’ relationship constituted a joint family venture.
Moreover, even if one were persuaded that the evi-




dence permitted resolution of the joint family ven-
ture issue, the record is unsatisfactory for deciding
whether Ms. Kerr’s contributions to a joint family
venture were linked to the accumulation of wealth
and, if so, in what proportion. The trial judge found
that her payment of household expenses and insur-
ance payments, along with the “proceeds” from the
Coleman Street property, allowed Mr. Baranow
to pay off the $116,000 mortgage on both proper-
ties before July 1985. There is, thus, a finding that
her contributions were linked to the accumulation
of wealth, given that the Wall Street property was
valued at $942,500 at the time of trial. However,
as the judge’s findings with respect to Ms. Kerr’s
equity in the Coleman Street property cannot
stand, this conclusion is considerably undermined.
For much the same reason, there is no possibil-
ity on this record of evaluating the proportionate
contributions to a joint family venture. In short,
to attempt to resolve Ms. Kerr’s unjust enrich-
ment claim on its merits, using the record before
this Court, involves too much uncertainty and risks
injustice.

[198] In this respect, the Kerr appeal is in marked
contrast to the Vanasse appeal. There, an unjust
enrichment was conceded and the trial judge’s
findings of fact closely correspond to the analytical
approach I have proposed. In the present appeal,
while the findings made do not appear to demon-
strate a joint family venture or a concomitant link
to accumulated wealth, it would be unfair to reach
that conclusion without giving an opportunity to
the parties to present their evidence and arguments
in light of the approach set out in these reasons.
358


[199] Reluctantly, therefore, I would order a new
trial of Ms. Kerr’s unjust enrichment claim, as well
as affirm the Court of Appeal’s order for a hearing
of Mr. Baranow’s counterclaim.




(3) Effective Date of Spousal Support

[200] The final issue is whether, as the Court of
Appeal held, the trial judge erred in making his
order for spousal support in favour of Ms. Kerr
effective on the date she had commenced proceed-
ings rather than on the first day of trial. In my
respectful view, the Court of Appeal erred in its
application of the relevant factors and ought not to
have set aside the trial judge’s order.

[201] The trial judge found that the appellant’s
income in 2006 was $28,787 and the respond-
ent’s income was $70,520, on the basis of their
respective income tax returns. He then applied the
Spousal Support Advisory Guidelines (“SSAG”) to
arrive at a range of $1,304 to $1,739 per month. He
settled on an amount at the higher end of that range
in order to assist Ms. Kerr in pursuing a private
bed while waiting for a subsidized bed in a suitable
facility closer to her family.

[202] The Court of Appeal agreed with the trial
judge that Ms. Kerr was entitled to an award of
spousal support given the length of the parties’
relationship, her age, her fixed and limited income
and her significant disability; she was entitled to a
spousal support award that would permit her to live
at a lifestyle that is closer to that which the parties
enjoyed when they were together; and that the judge
had properly determined the quantum of support.
The Court of Appeal concluded, however, that the
trial judge had erred in ordering support effective
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


the date Ms. Kerr had commenced proceedings. It
faulted the judge in several respects: for apparently
making the order as a matter of course rather than
applying the relevant legal principles; for failing to
consider that, during the interim period, Ms. Kerr
had no financial needs beyond her means because
she had been residing in a government-subsidized




care facility and had not had to encroach on her
capital; for failing to take account of the fact she
had made no demand of Mr. Baranow to contribute
to her interim support and had provided no expla-
nation for not having done so; and for ordering ret-
roactive support where, in light of the absence of
an interim application, there was no blameworthy
conduct on Mr. Baranow’s part.

[203] The appellant submits that the decision
to equate the principles pertaining to retroactive
spousal support with those of retroactive child sup-
port has been done without any discussion or legal
analysis. Furthermore, she argues that the Court of
Appeal’s reasoning places an untoward and inap-
propriate burden on applicants, essentially mandat-
ing that they apply for interim spousal support or
lose their entitlement. Lastly, she argues that there
is a legal distinction between retroactive support
before and after the application is filed, and that in
the latter circumstance there is less need for judi-
cial restraint. I agree with the second and third of
these submissions.

[204] There is no doubt that the trial judge
had the discretion to award support effective
the date proceedings had been commenced.
This is clear from the British Columbia Family
360


Relations Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 128 (“FRA”),
s. 93(5)(d):

93 . . .




(5) An order under this section may also provide
for one or more of the following:

.

(d) payment of support in respect of any
period before the order is made;

[205] The appellant requested support effec-
tive the date her writ of summons and statement
of claim were issued and served. She was and is
not seeking support for the period before she com-
menced her proceedings, or for any period during
which another court order for support was in effect.
I note that she was obliged by statute to seek sup-
port within a year of the end of cohabitation: defi-
nition of “spouse”, s. 1(1)(b) of the FRA. Ms. Kerr
made her application just over a month after the
parties ceased living together.

[206] I will not venture into the semantics of the
word “retroactive”: see D.B.S. v. S.R.G., 2006 SCC
37, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 231, at paras. 2 and 69-70; S. (L.)
v. P. (E.) (1999), 67 B.C.L.R. (3d) 254 (C.A.), at
paras. 55-57. Rather, I prefer to follow the example
of Bastarache J. in D.B.S. and consider the relevant
factors that come into play where support is sought
in relation to a period predating the order.

[207] While D.B.S. was concerned with child as
opposed to spousal support, I agree with the Court
of Appeal that similar considerations to those set
out in the context of child support are also relevant
to deciding the suitability of a “retroactive” award
of spousal support. Specifically, these factors are
the needs of the recipient, the conduct of the payor,
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


the reason for the delay in seeking support and any
hardship the retroactive award may occasion on the
payor spouse. However, in spousal support cases,
these factors must be considered and weighed in
light of the different legal principles and objec-
tives that underpin spousal as compared with child
support. I will mention some of those differences




briefly, although certainly not exhaustively.

[208] Spousal support has a different legal foun-
dation than child support. A parent-child relation-
ship is a fiduciary relationship of presumed depend-
ency and the obligation of both parents to support
the child arises at birth. In that sense, the entitlement
to child support is “automatic” and both parents
must put their child’s interests ahead of their own
in negotiating and litigating child support. Child
support is the right of the child, not of the parent
seeking support on the child’s behalf, and the basic
amount of child support under the Divorce Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp.), (as well as many pro-
vincial child support statutes) now depends on the
income of the payor and not on a highly discretion-
ary balancing of means and needs. These aspects
of child support reduce somewhat the strength of
concerns about lack of notice and lack of diligence
in seeking child support. With respect to notice, the
payor parent is or should be aware of the obliga-
tion to provide support commensurate with his or
her income. As for delay, the right to support is the
child’s and therefore it is the child’s, not the other
parent’s position that is prejudiced by lack of dili-
gence on the part of the parent seeking child sup-
port: see D.B.S., at paras. 36-39, 47-48, 59, 80 and
100-104. In contrast, there is no presumptive enti-
tlement to spousal support and, unlike child sup-
port, the spouse is in general not under any legal
obligation to look out for the separated spouse’s
legal interests. Thus, concerns about notice, delay
and misconduct generally carry more weight in
relation to claims for spousal support: see, e.g.,
M. L. Gordon, “Blame Over: Retroactive Child
and Spousal Support in the Post-Guideline Era”
362


(2004-2005), 23 C.F.L.Q. 243, at pp. 281 and 291-
92.





[209] Where, as here, the payor’s complaint is
that support could have been sought earlier, but
was not, there are two underlying interests at stake.
The first relates to the certainty of the payor’s legal
obligations; the possibility of an order that reaches
back into the past makes it more difficult to plan
one’s affairs and a sizeable “retroactive” award for
which the payor did not plan may impose finan-
cial hardship. The second concerns placing proper
incentives on the applicant to proceed with his or
her claims promptly (see D.B.S., at paras. 100-103).

[210] Neither of these concerns carries much
weight in this case. The order was made effective
the date on which the proceedings seeking relief
had been commenced, and there was no interim
order for some different amount. Commencement
of proceedings provided clear notice to the payor
that support was being claimed and permitted some
planning for the eventuality that it was ordered.
There is thus little concern about certainty of the
payor’s obligations. Ms. Kerr diligently pursued her
claim to trial and that being the case, there is little
need to provide further incentives for her or others
in her position to proceed with more diligence.

[211] In D.B.S., Bastarache J. referred to the date
of effective notice as the “general rule” and “default
option” for the choice of effective date of the order
(paras. 118 and 121; see also para. 125). The date
of the initiation of proceedings for spousal support
has been described by the Ontario Court of Appeal
as the “usual commencement date”, absent a reason
not to make the order effective as of that date:
MacKinnon v. MacKinnon (2005), 75 O.R. (3d)
175, at para. 24. While in my view, the decision
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


to order support for a period before the date of the
order should be the product of the exercise of judi-
cial discretion in light of the particular circum-
stances, the fact that the order is sought effective
from the commencement of proceedings will often
be a significant factor in how the relevant consid-
erations are weighed. It is important to note that, in




D.B.S., all four litigants were requesting that child
support payments reach back to a period in time
preceding their respective applications; such is not
the case here.
[212] Other relevant considerations noted in
D.B.S. include the conduct of the payor, the cir-
cumstances of the child (or in the case of spousal
support, the spouse seeking support), and any hard-
ship occasioned by the award. The focus of concern
about conduct must be on conduct broadly relevant
to the support obligation, for example, concealing
assets or failing to make appropriate disclosure:
D.B.S., at para. 106. Consideration of the circum-
stances of the spouse seeking support, by anal-
ogy to the D.B.S. analysis, will relate to the needs
of the spouse both at the time the support should
have been paid and at present. The comments of
Bastarache J. at para. 113 of D.B.S. may be easily
adapted to the situation of the spouse seeking sup-
port: “A [spouse] who underwent hardship in the
past may be compensated for this unfortunate cir-
cumstance through a retroactive award. On the
other hand, the argument for retroactive [spousal]
support will be less convincing where the [spouse]
already enjoyed all the advantages (s)he would
have received [from that support]”. As for hardship,
there is the risk that a retroactive award will not
be fashioned having regard to what the payor can
currently afford and may disrupt the payor’s ability
to manage his or her finances. However, it is also
critical to note that this Court in D.B.S. empha-
sized the need for flexibility and a holistic view of
each matter on its own merits; the same flexibil-
ity is appropriate when dealing with “retroactive”
spousal support.
364


[213] In light of these principles, my view is that
the Court of Appeal made two main errors.
[214] First, it erred by finding that the circum-
stances of the appellant were such that there was no
need prior to the trial. The trial judge found, and the
Court of Appeal did not dispute, that the appellant
was entitled to non-compensatory spousal support,




at the high end of the range suggested by the SSAG,
for an indefinite duration. Entitlement, quantum,
and the indefinite duration of the order were not
appealed before this Court. It is clear that Ms. Kerr
was in need of support from the respondent at the
date she started her proceedings and remained so at
the time of trial. The Court of Appeal rightly noted
the relevant factors, such as her age, disability, and
fixed income. However, the Court of Appeal did
not describe how Ms. Kerr’s circumstances had
changed between the commencement of proceed-
ings and the date of trial, nor is any such change
apparent in the trial judge’s findings of fact. As I
understand the record, one of the objectives of the
support order was to permit Ms. Kerr to have access
to a private pay bed while waiting for her name to
come up for a subsidized bed in a suitable facil-
ity closer to her son’s residence. From the date she
commenced her proceedings until the date of trial,
she resided in the Brock Fahrni Pavilion in a
government-funded extended care bed in a room
with three other people. In my respectful view, her
need was constant throughout the period. If the
Court of Appeal’s rationale was that Ms. Kerr’s
need would only arise once she actually had secured
the private pay bed, its decision to make the order
effective the first day of trial seems inconsistent
with that approach. The Court of Appeal did not
suggest that her need was any different on that day
than on the day she had commenced her proceed-
ings. Nor did the court point to any financial hard-
ship that the trial judge’s award would have on Mr.
Baranow.
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


[215] Respectfully, the Court of Appeal erred in
principle in setting aside the judge’s order effective
as of the date of commencement of proceedings
on the ground that Ms. Kerr had no need during
that period, while upholding the judge’s findings of
need in circumstances that were no different from
those existing at the time proceedings were com-




menced.

[216] Second, the Court of Appeal in my respect-
ful view was wrong to fault Ms. Kerr for not bring-
ing an interim application, in effect attributing to
her unreasonable delay in seeking support for the
period in question. Ms. Kerr commenced her pro-
ceedings promptly after separation and, in light
of the fact that the trial occurred only about thir-
teen months afterward, she apparently pursued
those proceedings to trial with diligence. There
was thus clear notice to Mr. Baranow that support
was being sought and he could readily take advice
on the likely extent of his liability. Given the high
financial, physical, and emotional costs of inter-
locutory applications, especially for a party with
limited means and a significant disability such as
Ms. Kerr, it was in my respectful view unreason-
able for the Court of Appeal to attach such serious
consequences to the fact that an interim application
was not pursued. The position taken by the Court
of Appeal to my way of thinking undermines the
incentives which should exist on parties to seek
financial disclosure, pursue their claims with due
diligence, and keep interlocutory proceedings to
a minimum. Requiring interim applications risks
prolonging rather than expediting proceedings.
The respondent’s argument based on the fact that
a different legal test would have applied at the
interim support stage is unconvincing. After a full
trial on the merits, the trial judge made clear and
now unchallenged findings of need on the basis of
circumstances that had not changed between com-
mencement of proceedings and trial.
366


[217] In short, there was virtually no delay in
applying for maintenance, nor was there any inor-
dinate delay between the date of application and
the date of trial. Ms. Kerr was in need through-
out the relevant period, she suffered from a serious
physical disability, and her standard of living was
markedly lower than it was while she lived with the




respondent. Mr. Baranow had the means to provide
support, had prompt notice of her claim, and there
was no indication in the Court of Appeal’s reasons
that it considered the judge’s award imposed on him
a hardship so as to make that award inappropriate.
[218] While it is regrettable that the judge did
not elaborate on his reasons for making the order
effective as of the date proceedings had been com-
menced, the relevant legal principles applied to the
facts as he found them support the making of that
order and the Court of Appeal erred in holding oth-
erwise.
[219] In summary, I conclude that the Court of
Appeal erred in setting aside the portion of the
judge’s order for support between the commence-
ment of proceedings and the beginning of trial. I
would restore the order of the trial judge making
spousal support effective September 14, 2006.
D. Disposition
[220] I would allow the appeal in part.
Specifically, I would:
a.
and restore the order of the trial judge with
respect to support;
b. allow the appeal with respect to the Court of
Appeal’s decision to dismiss Ms. Kerr’s unjust
enrichment claim and order a new trial of that
claim;
c.
claim of resulting trust and the ordering of a
[2011] 1 R.C.S.


new hearing of Mr. Baranow’s counterclaim
and affirm the order of the Court of Appeal in
relation to those issues.

[221] As Ms. Kerr has been substantially success-
ful, I would award her costs throughout.





Appeal 33157 allowed in part with costs.

Appeal 33358 allowed with costs.

Solicitors for the appellant Margaret Kerr:
Hawthorne, Piggott & Company, Burnaby.

Solicitor for the respondent Nelson Baranow:
Susan G. Label, Vancouver.

Solicitors for the appellant Michele Vanasse:
Nelligan O’Brien Payne, Ottawa.

Solicitors for the respondent David Seguin:
MacKinnon & Phillips, Ottawa.
