[2018] 3 R.C.S.



Michelle Constance Moore Appellant

v.

Risa Lorraine Sweet Respondent

Indexed as: Moore v. Sweet




2018 SCC 52
File No.: 37546.
2018: February 8; 2018: November 23.
Present: Wagner C.J. and Abella, Moldaver,
Karakatsanis, Gascon, Côté, Brown, Rowe and
Martin JJ.

ON APPEAL FROM THE COURT OF APPEAL FOR
ONTARIO
    Equity — Restitution — Unjust enrichment — Remedy
— Constructive trust — Husband and wife separating and
entering into contractual agreement pursuant to which
wife will pay husband’s life insurance policy premiums
in order to remain named sole beneficiary of policy —
Husband subsequently naming new common law spouse
as beneficiary without wife’s knowledge — Insurance pro‑
ceeds payable to common law spouse on husband’s death
despite wife having continued to pay premiums — Whether
common law spouse unjustly enriched at wife’s expense —
If so, whether constructive trust is appropriate remedy.
    Insurance — Life insurance — Beneficiary designation
— Wife designated as revocable beneficiary of husband’s
life insurance policy — After separation, wife agreeing to
continue to pay policy premiums to maintain beneficiary
designation — Husband subsequently designating new
common law spouse as irrevocable beneficiary without
wife’s knowledge — Insurance proceeds payable to com‑
mon law spouse on husband’s death — Whether desig‑
nation of common law spouse as irrevocable beneficiary
in accordance with statute precludes recovery for wife
with prior claim to benefit of policy — Insurance Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. I.8, ss. 190, 191.
   During L and M’s marriage, L purchased a term life insurance
 policy and designated M as revocable beneficiary.
They later separated, and entered into an oral agreement
whereby M would pay all of the policy premiums and, in
304


exchange, L would maintain M’s beneficiary designation.
Unbeknownst to M, L subsequently designated his new
common law spouse, R, as the irrevocable beneficiary of
the policy. When L passed away, the proceeds were therefore
 payable to R and not to M. At the time of L’s death,
his estate had no significant assets. M, who had paid about
$7,000 in policy premiums since separation, commenced
an application regarding her entitlement to the $250,000




policy proceeds. The application judge held that R had
been unjustly enriched at M’s expense and impressed the
proceeds with a constructive trust in M’s favour. The Court
of Appeal allowed R’s appeal and set aside the judgment
of the application judge.
   Held (Gascon and Rowe JJ. dissenting): The appeal
should be allowed.
   Per Wagner C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis,
Côté, Brown and Martin JJ.: R was enriched, M was correspondingly
 deprived, and both the enrichment and deprivation
 occurred in the absence of a juristic reason. Therefore,
a remedial constructive trust should be imposed for M’s
benefit.
    A constructive trust is understood primarily as an equitable
 remedy that may be imposed at a court’s discretion. A
proper equitable basis, such as a successful claim in unjust
enrichment, must first be found to exist. A plaintiff will
succeed on the cause of action in unjust enrichment if he
or she can show three elements: (1) that the defendant was
enriched; (2) that the plaintiff suffered a corresponding
deprivation; and (3) that the defendant’s enrichment and
the plaintiff’s corresponding deprivation occurred in the
absence of a juristic reason.
   Regarding the first element, the parties do not dispute
the fact that R was enriched to the full extent of the insurance
 proceeds in the amount of $250,000, by virtue
of her right to receive them as the designated irrevocable
beneficiary of L’s policy.
    The second element focuses on what the plaintiff actually
 lost and on whether that loss corresponds to the
defendant’s enrichment, such that the latter was enriched
at the expense of the former. The measure of deprivation
is not limited to the plaintiff’s out‑of-pocket expenditures
or to the benefit taken directly from him or her. Rather, the
concept of loss also captures a benefit that was never in the
plaintiff’s possession but that the court finds would have
[2018] 3 R.C.S.



accrued for his or her benefit had it not been received by
the defendant instead. This element does not require that
the disputed benefit be conferred directly by the plaintiff
on the defendant. In this case, the extent of M’s deprivation
 is not limited to the $7,000 she paid in premiums.
She stands deprived of the right to receive the entirety
of the insurance proceeds, a value of $250,000. It is also
clear that R’s enrichment came at M’s expense. Not only




did M’s payment of the premiums make R’s enrichment
possible, but R’s designation gave her the statutory right
to receive the insurance proceeds. Because R received
the benefit that otherwise would have accrued to M, the
requisite correspondence exists: the former was enriched
at the expense of the latter.
    To establish the third element, it must be demonstrated
that both the enrichment and corresponding deprivation
occurred without a juristic reason. The juristic reason
analysis proceeds in two stages. The first stage requires
the plaintiff to demonstrate that the defendant’s retention
of the benefit at the plaintiff’s expense cannot be justified
on the basis of any of the established categories of juristic
reasons, such as disposition of law or statutory obligations.
A plaintiff’s claim will necessarily fail if a legislative
enactment justifies the enrichment and corresponding
deprivation. In this case, a beneficiary designation made
pursuant to ss. 190(1) and 191(1) of the Insurance Act
does not provide a juristic reason for R’s enrichment at
M’s expense. Nothing in the Insurance Act can be read as
ousting the common law or equitable rights that persons
other than the designated beneficiary may have in policy
 proceeds. The legislature is presumed not to depart
from prevailing law without expressing its intention to
do so with irresistible clearness. While the Insurance Act
provides the mechanism by which beneficiaries become
statutorily entitled to receive policy proceeds, no part of
the Act operates with the necessary irresistible clearness
to preclude the existence of contractual or equitable rights
in those proceeds once they have been paid to the named
beneficiary. Furthermore, the Insurance Act provisions
applicable to irrevocable beneficiary designations do not
require, either expressly or implicitly, that a beneficiary
keep the proceeds as against a plaintiff in an unjust enrichment
 claim, who stands deprived of his or her prior
contractual entitlement to claim such proceeds upon the
insured’s death. Accordingly, an irrevocable designation
under the Act cannot constitute a juristic reason for R’s
enrichment and M’s deprivation. Neither by direct reference
 nor by necessary implication does the Insurance
Act either foreclose a third party who stands deprived
of his or her contractual entitlement to claim insurance
proceeds by successfully asserting an unjust enrichment
306


claim against the designated beneficiary — revocable or
irrevocable — or preclude the imposition of a constructive
trust in circumstances such as these. Therefore, no established
 category of juristic reason applies.




   Once the plaintiff has successfully demonstrated that
no category of juristic reason applies, a prima facie case
is established and the analysis proceeds to the second
stage. At this stage, the defendant must establish some
residual reason why the enrichment should be retained.
Considerations such as the parties’ reasonable expectations
 and moral and policy-based arguments come into
play. In the present case, it is clear that both parties expected
 to receive the proceeds of the life insurance policy.
However, the residual considerations favour M, given that
her contribution towards the payment of the premiums
actually kept the policy alive and made R’s entitlement to
receive the proceeds upon L’s death possible.
   Once each of the three elements of the cause of action
in unjust enrichment is made out, the remedy is restitutionary
 in nature and can take one of two forms: personal
or proprietary. A personal remedy is essentially a debt or
a monetary obligation and can be viewed as the default
remedy for unjust enrichment. In certain cases, however, a
plaintiff may be awarded a remedy of a proprietary nature.
The most pervasive and important proprietary remedy for
unjust enrichment is the constructive trust. Courts will
impress the disputed property with a constructive trust
only if the plaintiff can establish that a personal remedy
would be inadequate; and that there is a link between his
or her contributions and the disputed property. Ordinarily,
a personal award would be adequate in cases such as this
one where the property at stake is money. In the present
case, however, the disputed insurance money has been
paid into court and is readily available to be impressed
with a constructive trust. Moreover, M’s payment of the
premiums was causally connected to the maintenance of
the policy under which R was enriched. A constructive
trust to the full extent of the proceeds should therefore be
imposed in M’s favour.
   Per Gascon and Rowe JJ. (dissenting): There is disa-
greement with the majority that M has established a claim
[2018] 3 R.C.S.



in unjust enrichment on these facts and therefore, that a
constructive trust should be imposed.
   M had a contract with L to be maintained the named
beneficiary of his life insurance policy while she paid
the premiums. However, this contract does not create a
proprietary or equitable interest in the policy’s proceeds




and simply being named as a beneficiary does not give
one a right in the proceeds before the death of the insured.
The right to claim the proceeds only crystalizes upon the
insured’s death. Further, as a revocable beneficiary, M had
no right to contest L’s redesignation of R as an irrevocable
 beneficiary outside of a claim against L for breach of
contract. Thus, at the time of L’s death, the only rights that
M possessed in relation to the life insurance contract were
her contractual rights.
   While M would have a claim against L’s estate for
breach of contract, the estate’s lack of assets has rendered
any such recourse fruitless. Instead, M’s claim is to reverse
 the purported unjust enrichment of R. In an action
for unjust enrichment, a plaintiff must show that their
deprivation corresponds to the defendant’s enrichment.
The correspondence between the deprivation and the enrichment
, while seemingly formalistic, is fundamental.
Correspondence is the connection between the parties — a
plus and a minus as obverse manifestations of the same
event — that uniquely identifies the plaintiff as the proper
person to seek restitution against a particular defendant.
   In this case, it is clear that but for M’s payments, the
policy would have lapsed, and but for L’s breach of contract
, M would have been the beneficiary at the time of
his death. But these facts are not enough to establish that
the deprivation and the enrichment are corresponding.
R’s enrichment was not at the expense of M because R’s
enrichment is not dependent on M’s deprivation. What R
received (a statutory entitlement to proceeds) is different
from M’s deprivation (the inability to enforce her contractual
 rights) — they are not two sides of the same coin.
    Even if a corresponding deprivation could be established
, M’s claim in unjust enrichment would fail at the
first stage of the juristic reason analysis, because the Insurance Act establishes a juristic reason for R’s enrichment
. Section 191(1) of the Insurance Act provides that
an insured may designate an irrevocable beneficiary under
 a life insurance policy, and thereby provide special
308


protections to that beneficiary. From the moment an irrevocable
 beneficiary is designated, they have a right in
the policy itself: the insurance money is not subject to the
control of the insured or to the claims of his or her creditors
, and the beneficiary must consent to any subsequent
changes to beneficiary designation. As it is undisputed
that R was the validly designated irrevocable beneficiary
of the policy, she is entitled to the proceeds free of the




claims of L’s creditors.
    The fact that M had an agreement with L for the proceeds
 of the policy pursuant to which she paid its premiums
 does not undermine the presence of this juristic
reason. As M’s rights are contractual in nature, she is a
creditor of L’s estate and thus, by the provisions of the
Insurance Act, has no claim to the proceeds. The Insurance
Act explicitly protects irrevocable beneficiaries from the
claims of the deceased’s creditors and provides that the
insurance proceeds do not form part of the insured’s estate
. Thus, the Insurance Act precludes the existence of
contractual rights in those insurance proceeds.
    The Insurance Act’s legislative history further supports
R’s retention of the insurance proceeds notwithstanding
M’s claim. The provisions of the Insurance Act were designed
 to protect the interests of beneficiaries in retaining
the proceeds and provide no basis whatsoever for a person
paying the premiums to assume she would have any claim
to the eventual proceeds. The Insurance Act is deliberately
indifferent to the source of the premium payments and
renders the actions of the payers irrelevant as far as the
beneficiaries are concerned.
    In immunizing beneficiaries from the claims of the
insured’s creditors, the Insurance Act does not distinguish
between types of creditors. Creditors of the insured’s estate
 simply do not have a claim to the insurance proceeds.
There is no basis to carve out a special class of creditor
 who would be exempt from the clear wording of the
Insurance Act. Neither M’s contributions to the policy,
nor her contract with L are sufficient to take her outside
the comprehensive scheme and grant her special and preferred
 status.
    Even if the Insurance Act did not establish a juristic
reason for R’s enrichment, the policy considerations at the
second stage of the juristic reason analysis weigh against
allowing M’s claim of unjust enrichment. It is an unfortunate
 reality that a person’s death is sometimes accompanied
 by litigation that can tie up funds that the deceased
[2018] 3 R.C.S.



intended to support loved ones for a significant period of
time, adding financial hardship to personal tragedy. In an
attempt to ensure that life insurance proceeds could be free
from such strife, the Ontario legislator empowered policy
 holders to designate an irrevocable beneficiary under
s. 191(1) of the Insurance Act. Such a designation ensures
that the proceeds can be disbursed free from claims against
the estate, giving certainty to insured, insurer and beneficiary




 alike. This provision should be given full effect.

Cases Cited
By Côté J.
    Applied: Garland v. Consumers’ Gas Co., 2004 SCC
25, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 629; Kerr v. Baranow, 2011 SCC
10, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 269; Shannon v. Shannon (1985),
50 O.R. (2d) 456; distinguished: Reference re Goods and
Services Tax, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 445; Gladstone v. Canada
(Attorney General), 2005 SCC 21, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 325;
referred to: Soulos v. Korkontzilas, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 217;
Peter v. Beblow, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 980; Peel (Regional
Municipality) v. Canada, [1992] 3 S.C.R. 762; Rathwell
v. Rathwell, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 436; Murdoch v. Murdoch,
[1975] 1 S.C.R. 423; Pettkus v. Becker, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 834;
Pacific National Investments Ltd. v. Victoria (City), 2004
SCC 75, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 575; Professional Institute of the
Public Service of Canada v. Canada (Attorney General),
2012 SCC 71, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 660; Kleinwort Benson Ltd.
v. Birmingham City Council, [1997] Q.B. 380; Citadel
General Assurance Co. v. Lloyds Bank Canada, [1997]
3 S.C.R. 805; Lac Minerals Ltd. v. International Corona
Resources Ltd., [1989] 2 S.C.R. 574; Cie Immobilière
Viger Ltée v. Lauréat Giguère Inc., [1977] 2 S.C.R. 67;
Lacroix v. Valois, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1259; Love v. Love,
2013 SKCA 31, 359 D.L.R. (4th) 504; Central Trust Co.
v. Rafuse, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 147; Garland v. Consumers’
Gas Co. (2001), 57 O.R. (3d) 127; Saskatchewan Crop
Insurance Corp. v. Deck, 2008 SKCA 21, 307 Sask. R.
206; Richardson (Estate Trustee of) v. Mew, 2009 ONCA
403, 96 O.R. (3d) 65; Rawluk v. Rawluk, [1990] 1 S.C.R.
70; Gendron v. Supply and Services Union of the Public
Service Alliance of Canada, Local 50057, [1990] 1
S.C.R. 1298; KBA Canada Inc. v. 3S Printers Inc., 2014
BCCA 117, 59 B.C.L.R. (5th) 273; Bank of Montreal v.
Innovation Credit Union, 2010 SCC 47, [2010] 3 S.C.R.
3; Chanowski v. Bauer, 2010 MBCA 96, 258 Man. R. (2d)
244; Central Guaranty Trust Co. v. Dixdale Mortgage
Investment Corp. (1994), 24 O.R. (3d) 506; Zaidan Group
310


Ltd. v. London (City) (1990), 71 O.R. (2d) 65, aff’d [1991]
3 S.C.R. 593; Sorochan v. Sorochan, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 38.
By Gascon and Rowe JJ. (dissenting)
     Air Canada v. British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1161;




Lac Minerals Ltd. v. International Corona Resources Ltd.,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 574; Love v. Love, 2013 SKCA 31, 359
D.L.R. (4th) 504; Holowa Estate v. Stell-Holowa, 2011
ABQB 23, 330 D.L.R. (4th) 693; Richardson (Estate
Trustee of) v. Mew, 2009 ONCA 403, 96 O.R. (3d) 65;
Roberts v. Martindale (1998), 55 B.C.L.R. (3d) 63; Milne
Estate v. Milne, 2014 BCSC 2112, 54 R.F.L. (7th) 328;
Ladner v. Wolfson, 2011 BCCA 370, 24 B.C.L.R. (5th)
43; Schorlemer Estate v. Schorlemer (2006), 29 E.T.R.
(3d) 181; Steeves v. Steeves (1995), 168 N.B.R. (2d) 226;
Gregory v. Gregory (1994), 92 B.C.L.R. (2d) 133; Shannon v. Shannon (1985), 50 O.R. (2d) 456; Garland v.
Consumers’ Gas Co., 2004 SCC 25, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 629;
Peter v. Beblow, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 980; Professional Institute of the Public Service of Canada v. Canada (Attorney
General), 2012 SCC 71, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 660; Cie Immobilière Viger Ltée v. Lauréat Giguère Inc., [1977] 2 S.C.R.
67; Pacific National Investments Ltd. v. Victoria (City),
2004 SCC 75, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 575; Rathwell v. Rathwell,
[1978] 2 S.C.R. 436; Peel (Regional Municipality) v. Canada, [1992] 3 S.C.R. 762; Kerr v. Baranow, 2011 SCC
10, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 269; Soulos v. Korkontzilas, [1997]
2 S.C.R. 217; Pettkus v. Becker, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 834;
Chanowski v. Bauer, 2010 MBCA 96, 258 Man. R. (2d)
244; Fraser v. Fraser (1995), 9 E.T.R. (2d) 136; Ontario
Teachers’ Pension Plan Board v. Ontario (Superintendent
of Financial Services) (2004), 70 O.R. (3d) 61; Snider v.
Mallon, 2011 ONSC 4522, 3 R.F.L. (7th) 228; Bielny v.
Dzwiekowski, [2002] I.L.R. ¶I‑4018, aff’d [2002] O.J.
No. 508 (QL); Kang v. Kang Estate, 2002 BCCA 696,
44 C.C.L.I. (3d) 52; Ladner Estate, Re, 2004 BCCA 366,
40 B.C.L.R. (4th) 298.

Statutes and Regulations Cited
Act to secure to Wives and Children the benefit of Assurances on the lives of their Husbands and Parents, S.
   Prov. C. 1865, 29 Vict., c. 17, ss. 3, 5.
Act to Secure to Wives and Children the Benefit of Life
   Insurance, S.O. 1884, c. 20, s. 5.
Insurance Act, R.S.O. 1960, c. 190, ss. 164(1), 165.
Insurance Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. I.8, Part V, ss. 171(1) “beneficiary
   ”, 172(1), 190, 191, 195, 196(1), 200.
[2018] 3 R.C.S.



Succession Law Reform Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.26, ss. 58,
   72(1)(f).

Authors Cited
Birks, Peter. Unjust Enrichment, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford
   University Press, 2005.




Burrows, Andrew. The Law of Restitution, 3rd ed. Oxford:
   Oxford University Press, 2011.
Goff & Jones: The Law of Unjust Enrichment, 9th ed. by
   Charles Mitchell, Paul Mitchell and Stephen Watterson.
   London: Thomson Reuters, 2016.
Maddaugh, Peter D., and John D. McCamus. The Law of
   Restitution, loose-leaf ed. Aurora, Ont.: Canada Law
   Book, 2004 (updated December 2017, release 20).
McInnes, Mitchell. The Canadian Law of Unjust Enrichment and Restitution. Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis
   Canada, 2014.
McVitty, Edmund Hugh. A Commentary on the Life Insurance Laws of Canada. Toronto: Institute of Chartered
   Life Underwriters of Canada, 1962 (loose-leaf).
Norwood on Life Insurance Law in Canada, 3rd ed. by
   David Norwood and John P. Weir. Toronto: Carswell,
   2002.
Smith, Lionel. “Demystifying Juristic Reasons” (2007),
   45 Can. Bus. L.J. 281.
Smith, Lionel. “Restitution: The Heart of Corrective Justice” (2001), 79 Tex. L. Rev. 2115.
Smith, Lionel D. “Three-Party Restitution: A Critique of
   Birks’s Theory of Interceptive Subtraction” (1991), 11
   Oxford J. Leg. Stud. 481.
Virgo, Graham. The Principles of the Law of Restitution,
   3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015.
Waters’ Law of Trusts in Canada, 4th ed. by Donovan
   W. M. Waters, Mark R. Gillen and Lionel D. Smith.
   Toronto: Carswell, 2012.

   APPEAL from a judgment of the Ontario Court of
Appeal (Strathy C.J. and Blair and Lauwers JJ.A.),
2017 ONCA 182, 134 O.R. (3d) 721, 409 D.L.R.
(4th) 312, 65 C.C.L.I. (5th) 175, 32 C.C.P.B. (2nd)
254, [2017] O.J. No. 1129 (QL), 2017 C arswellOnt
2958 (WL Can.), setting aside a decision of Wilton-Siegel J., 2015 ONSC 3914, [2015] O.J. No. 7761
(QL), 2015 CarswellOnt 20995 (WL Can.). Appeal
allowed, Gascon and Rowe JJ. dissenting.

  Ian M. Hull, Suzana Popovic-Montag and David M.
Smith, for the appellant.
312


   Jeremy Opolsky and Jonathan Silver, for the respondent
.

  The judgment of Wagner C.J. and Abella,
Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Côté, Brown and Martin JJ.
was delivered by




     Côté J. —

I.

[1] This appeal involves a contest between two
innocent parties, both of whom claim an entitlement
to the proceeds of a life insurance policy.

[2] The appellant, Michelle Constance Moore
(“Michelle”), and the owner of the policy, Lawrence
Anthony Moore (“Lawrence”), were former spouses.
They entered into a contractual agreement pursuant
to which Michelle would pay all of the policy’s premiums
 and, in exchange, Lawrence would maintain
Michelle as the sole beneficiary thereunder — and
she would therefore be entitled to receive the proceeds
 of the policy upon Lawrence’s death. While
Michelle held up her end of the bargain, Lawrence
did not. Shortly after assuming his contractual obligation
, and unbeknownst to Michelle, Lawrence
designated his new common law spouse — the respondent
, Risa Lorraine Sweet (“Risa”) — as the ir‑
revocable beneficiary of the policy. When Lawrence
passed away several years later, the proceeds were
payable to Risa and not to Michelle.

[3] Should these proceeds be impressed with a constructive
 trust in Michelle’s favour? A majority of the
Ontario Court of Appeal found that they should not.
I disagree; in my view, Risa was enriched, Michelle
was correspondingly deprived, and both the enrichment
 and the deprivation occurred in the absence of
a juristic reason. In these circumstances, a remedial
constructive trust should be imposed for Michelle’s
benefit. I would therefore allow the appeal.
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


II. Context

[4] Michelle and Lawrence were married in 1979.
Together, they had three children. In October 1985,
Lawrence purchased a term life insurance policy
from Canadian General Life Insurance Company,
the predecessor of RBC Life Insurance Company




(“Insurance Company”). He purchased this policy,
with a coverage amount of $250,000, and initially
designated Michelle as the beneficiary — but not
as an irrevocable beneficiary. The annual premium
of $507.50 was paid out of the couple’s joint bank
account until 2000.

[5] In December 1999, Michelle and Lawrence
separated. Shortly thereafter, they entered into
an oral agreement (“Oral Agreement”) whereby
Michelle “would pay the premiums and be entitled
 to the proceeds of the Policy on [Lawrence’s]
death” (Superior Court decision, 2015 ONSC 3914,
at para. 13 (CanLII)). The effect of this agreement
was therefore to require that Michelle remain designated
 as the sole beneficiary of Lawrence’s life
insurance policy.

[6] In the summer of 2000, Lawrence began cohab-
iting with Risa. They remained common law spouses
and lived in Risa’s apartment until Lawrence’s death
13 years later.

[7] On September 21, 2000, Lawrence executed a
change of beneficiary form designating Risa as the
irrevocable beneficiary of the policy. Risa testified
that Lawrence did so because he did not want her
to worry about how she would pay the rent or buy
medication, and wanted to make sure that she would
be able to continue living in the building where she
had resided for the preceding 40 years.

[8] The change in beneficiary designation was made
through, and after consultation with, Lawrence’s insurance
 broker, who also happened to be Michelle’s
brother‑in-law. The new designation was recorded
by the Insurance Company on September 25, 2000.
Although Lawrence did not change the beneficiary
 designation surreptitiously, he did not advise
314


Michelle that she was no longer named as beneficiary
.1

[9] Michelle and Lawrence entered into a formal
separation agreement in May 2002. This agreement
dealt with a number of issues as between them, but
was silent as to the policy and anything related to




it. They finalized their divorce on October 3, 2003.

[10] Pursuant to her obligation under the Oral
Agreement, and without knowing that Lawrence had
named Risa as the irrevocable beneficiary, Michelle
continued to pay all of the premiums on the policy until
Lawrence’s death. By then, a total of $30,535.64 had
been paid on account of premiums; about $7,000 had
been paid since 2000.

[11] Lawrence died on June 20, 2013. His estate
had no significant assets.

[12] Michelle was advised by the Insurance Company that she was not the designated beneficiary of
the policy on July 5, 2013, around two weeks after
Lawrence’s death. On February 12, 2014, Michelle
commenced an application seeking the opinion, ad-
vice and direction of the Ontario Superior Court
of Justice as to her entitlement to the proceeds of
the policy. Pursuant to a court order dated December 19, 2013, the Insurance Company paid the proceeds
 of the policy into court pending the resolution
of the dispute.

[13] Part V of the Insurance Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. I.8, sets out a comprehensive scheme that governs
the rights and obligations of parties to a life insurance
 policy. It applies to all life insurance contracts
“[d]espite any agreement, condition or stipulation
to the contrary” (s. 172(1)), which means that the
parties cannot contract out of its provisions.

[14] Of particular relevance for the purposes of
this appeal are the provisions of the Insurance Act
1
    There is no dispute between the parties that the Oral Agreement
    was entered into sometime prior to the date on which Lawrence
    designated Risa as irrevocable beneficiary (transcript, at pp. 6‑7).
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


that deal with the designation of beneficiaries. A
“beneficiary” of a life insurance policy is defined as
“a person, other than the insured or the insured’s personal
 representative, to whom or for whose benefit
insurance money is made payable in a contract or by
a declaration” (s. 171(1)). A beneficiary designation
therefore identifies the intended recipient of the proceeds




 under the life insurance policy upon the death
of the insured person, in accordance with the terms
of the policy.

[15] Part V of the Insurance Act recognizes two
types of beneficiary designations: those that are rev‑
ocable and those that are irrevocable. A revocable
beneficiary designation is one that can be altered
or revoked by the insured without the beneficiary’s
knowledge or consent (s. 190(1) and (2)). An irrevocable
 beneficiary designation, by contrast, can be
altered or revoked only if the designated beneficiary
consents (s. 191(1)). When a valid irrevocable beneficiary
 designation is made, s. 191 of the Insurance
Act makes clear that the insurance money ceases to
be subject to the control of the insured, is not subject
to the claims of the insured’s creditors and does not
form part of the insured’s estate.

[16] It is clear that the interest of an irrevocable
beneficiary is afforded much more protection than
that of a revocable beneficiary; the former has a
“statutory right to remain as the named beneficiary
entitled to receive the insurance moneys unless he
or she consents to being removed” (Court of Appeal
decision, 2017 ONCA 182, 134 O.R. (3d) 721, at
para. 82). The legislation contemplates only one
situation where insurance money can be clawed back
from a beneficiary, regardless of whether his or her
designation is irrevocable: to satisfy a support claim
brought by a dependant against the estate of the now-deceased insured person (Succession Law Reform
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.26, ss. 58 and 72(1)(f)). No
such claim has been brought in this case.

[17] Part V of the Insurance Act also deals with the
assignment of a life insurance policy. A life insurance
316


contract entails a promise by the insurer “to pay the
contractual benefit when the insured event occurs”
(Norwood on Life Insurance Law in Canada (3rd
ed. 2002), by D. Norwood and J. P. Weir, at p. 359).
It can therefore be understood as creating a chose
in action against the insurer, which is transferrable
from one person to another through the mechanism




of an assignment. The statute provides that where the
assignee gives written notice of the assignment to the
insurer, he or she assumes all of the assignor’s rights
and interests in the policy. Pursuant to s. 200(1)(b) of
the Insurance Act, however, an assignee’s interest in
the policy will not have priority over that of an irrevocable
 beneficiary who was designated prior to the
time the assignee gave notice to the insurer — unless
the irrevocable beneficiary consents to the assignment
 and surrenders his or her interest in the policy.

[18] The relevant provisions of the Insurance Act
read as follows:

190 (1) Subject to subsection (4),2 an insured may in a
contract or by a declaration designate the insured, the
insured’s personal representative or a beneficiary as one
to whom or for whose benefit insurance money is to be
payable.

(2) Subject to section 191, the insured may from time to
time alter or revoke the designation by a declaration.

                                ...

191 (1) An insured may in a contract, or by a declaration
other than a declaration that is part of a will, filed with
the insurer at its head or principal office in Canada during
the lifetime of the person whose life is insured, designate
a beneficiary irrevocably, and in that event the insured,
while the beneficiary is living, may not alter or revoke the
designation without the consent of the beneficiary and the
insurance money is not subject to the control of the insured
, is not subject to the claims of the insured’s creditor
and does not form part of the insured’s estate.

(2) Where the insured purports to designate a beneficiary
irrevocably in a will or in a declaration that is not filed

2
    The exception in subs. (4) does not apply in the circumstances of
    this case.
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


as provided in subsection (1), the designation has the
same effect as if the insured had not purported to make
it irrevocable.

200 (1) Where an assignee of a contract gives notice in
writing of the assignment to the insurer at its head or
principal office in Canada, the assignee has priority of
interest as against,




   (a)
         lier in like manner; and

   (b)
         ocably as provided in section 191 prior to the
         time the assignee gave notice to the insurer of
         the assignment in the manner prescribed in this
         subsection.

(2) Where a contract is assigned as security, the rights of
a beneficiary under the contract are affected only to the
extent necessary to give effect to the rights and interests
of the assignee.

(3) Where a contract is assigned unconditionally and
otherwise than as security, the assignee has all the rights
and interests given to the insured by the contract and by
this Part and shall be deemed to be the insured.

                           ...

III. Decisions Below

A. Ontario Superior Court of Justice (Wilton-Siegel J.)
   — 2015 ONSC 3914

[19] The application judge, Wilton-Siegel J., held
that Risa had been unjustly enriched at Michelle’s
expense, and therefore impressed the proceeds of
the policy with a constructive trust in Michelle’s
favour. He began his reasons by addressing a prelim-
inary matter: the Oral Agreement that Lawrence and
Michelle had entered into during their separation.
He held that Michelle and Lawrence “each had an
equitable interest in the proceeds of the Policy from
the time that it was taken out” and that the Oral
Agreement had effectively resulted in the “equitable
assignment to [Michelle] of [Lawrence’s] equitable
interest in the proceeds in return for [Michelle’s]
agreement to pay the premiums on the Policy”
(para. 17) (CanLII). According to the application
318


judge, this equitable interest “took the form of a right
to determine the beneficiary of the Policy” (para. 18).

[20] The application judge then turned to Michelle’s
unjust enrichment claim. He found that the first
two elements of the cause of action in unjust enrichment




 — an enrichment of the defendant and a
corresponding deprivation suffered by the plaintiff
 — were easily met in this case: Risa had been
enriched by virtue of her valid designation as irrevocable
 beneficiary, and Michelle had suffered
a corresponding deprivation to the extent that she
paid the premiums and to the extent that the proceeds
 had been payable to Risa “notwithstanding
the prior equitable assignment of such proceeds to
her” (para. 27). With respect to the third and final
element — the absence of a juristic reason for the
enrichment — the application judge held that Risa’s
designation as beneficiary under the policy did not
constitute a juristic reason that entitled her to retain
the proceeds in the particular circumstances of this
case (para. 46). This was because Risa’s entitlement
 to the proceeds would not have been possible
if Michelle had not performed her obligations under
the Oral Agreement, and because the Oral Agreement
itself amounted to an equitable assignment of the
proceeds to Michelle (para. 48).

B. Ontario Court of Appeal (Strathy C.J.O. and
   Blair J.A., Lauwers J.A. dissenting) — 2017
   ONCA 182, 134 O.R. (3d) 721

[21] The Ontario Court of Appeal allowed Risa’s
appeal and set aside the judgment of the application
judge. It ordered that the $7,000 Michelle had paid
in premiums between 2000 and 2013 be paid out of
court to her and that the balance of the insurance
proceeds be paid to Risa.

  (1) Majority Reasons

[22] Writing for himself and for Strathy C.J.O.,
Blair J.A. held that it was not open to the application
judge to find that the Oral Agreement amounted to an
equitable assignment, since the doctrine of equitable
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


assignment had not been placed in issue by the parties
 before him.

[23] Turning to Michelle’s unjust enrichment
claim, Blair J.A. accepted the application judge’s
finding that Risa was enriched. He found it unnec-
essary to resolve the issue of whether the corresponding




 deprivation element had been made out
as he found there was a juristic reason justifying
the receipt by Risa of the proceeds. Specifically,
Blair J.A. held that the application judge had erred
in his approach to the juristic reason element of the
unjust enrichment framework — first, by failing to
recognize the significance of Risa’s designation as
an irrevocable beneficiary, and second, by failing to
apply the two-stage analysis mandated by this Court
in Garland v. Consumers’ Gas Co., 2004 SCC 25,
[2004] 1 S.C.R. 629. In Blair J.A.’s view, “the existence
 of the statutory regime relating to revocable
and irrevocable beneficiaries . . . falls into an existing
recognized category of juristic reason”, constituting
“both a disposition of law and a statutory obligation”
(para. 99).

[24] Blair J.A. declined to decide whether a constructive
 trust can be imposed only to remedy unjust
enrichment and wrongful acts or can also be based
on the more elastic concept of “good conscience”.
He took the position that there was nothing in the
circumstances of this case that put it in some “good
conscience” category beyond what was captured by
unjust enrichment and wrongful act.

  (2) Dissenting Reasons

[25] In dissent, Lauwers J.A. agreed with the majority
 that the application judge had erred in relying
on the equitable assignment doctrine. However, he
disagreed with the majority as to the disposition of
Michelle’s unjust enrichment claim and the propriety
of imposing a constructive trust over the proceeds
in these circumstances. He would therefore have
dismissed the appeal.
320


[26] Lauwers J.A. began by considering this Court’s
decision in Soulos v. Korkontzilas, [1997] 2 S.C.R.
217, and held that it leaves open four routes by which
a constructive trust may be imposed: (1) as a remedy
for unjust enrichment; (2) for wrongful acts; (3) in
circumstances where its availability has long been
recognized; and (4) otherwise where good conscience




requires it. According to Lauwers J.A., in relation to
the fourth route, the Soulos court anticipated that the
law of remedial trusts would continue to develop in
a way that accommodates the changing needs and
mores of society.

[27] On the issue of unjust enrichment, Lauwers J.A.
concluded that Michelle had made out each of the
requisite elements and that a constructive trust ought
therefore to be imposed over the proceeds in her favour
. With respect to the corresponding deprivation
element, he rejected the submission that Michelle’s
financial contribution was the correct measure of her
deprivation, and instead found that the asset for which
she had paid and of which she stood deprived was the
full payout of the life insurance proceeds — not just
the amount she had paid in premiums.

[28] Lauwers J.A. also rejected the proposition that
the applicable Insurance Act provisions provided a
juristic reason for Risa’s retention of the proceeds.
In his view, Michelle’s entitlement to the insurance
proceeds as against Risa was neither precluded nor
affected by the operation of the Insurance Act. He
also held that a juristic reason could not be found
based on the parties’ reasonable expectations or public
 policy considerations.

[29] Finally, regarding to the imposition of a constructive
 trust, Lauwers J.A. considered a number of
other cases that involved disappointed beneficiaries.
Noting that these cases fit awkwardly under the unjust
 enrichment rubric, he observed that:

    . . . the disappointed beneficiary cases are perhaps better
 understood as a genus of cases in which a constructive
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


trust can be imposed via the third route in Soulos — circumstances
 where the availability of a trust has previously
been recognized — and the fourth route — where good
conscience otherwise demands it, quite independent of
unjust enrichment. [para. 276]

IV. Issues




[30] The issues in this case are as follows:

A. Has Michelle made out a claim in unjust enrichment
    by establishing:
(1) Risa’s enrichment and her own corresponding
    deprivation; and
(2) the absence of any juristic reason for Risa’s enrichment
     at her expense?

B. If so, is a constructive trust the appropriate remedy
   ?

V. Analysis

[31] In the present case, Michelle requests that the
insurance proceeds be impressed with a constructive
trust in her favour. The primary basis on which she
seeks this remedy is unjust enrichment. In the alter-
native, she submits that the circumstances of her case
provide a separate good conscience basis upon which
a court may impose a constructive trust.

[32] A constructive trust is a vehicle of equity
through which one person is required by operation of
law — regardless of any intention — to hold certain
property for the benefit of another (Waters’ Law of
Trusts in Canada (4th ed. 2012), by D. W. M. Waters,
M. R. Gillen and L. D. Smith, at p. 478). In Canada,
it is understood primarily as a remedy, which may
be imposed at a court’s discretion where good
conscience so requires. As McLachlin J. (as she then
was) noted in Soulos:

   . . . under the broad umbrella of good conscience,
constructive trusts are recognized both for wrongful acts
322


like fraud and breach of duty of loyalty, as well as to
remedy unjust enrichment and corresponding deprivation
. . . . Within these two broad categories, there is room
for the law of constructive trust to develop and for greater
precision to be attained, as time and experience may dic-
tate. [Emphasis added; para. 43.]




[33] What is therefore crucial to recognize is that
a proper equitable basis must exist before the courts
will impress certain property with a remedial constructive
 trust. The cause of action in unjust enrichment
 may provide one such basis, so long as the
plaintiff can also establish that a monetary award is
insufficient and that there is a link between his or
her contributions and the disputed property (Peter
v. Beblow, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 980, at p. 997; Kerr v.
Baranow, 2011 SCC 10, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 269, at
paras. 50‑51). Absent this, a plaintiff seeking the imposition
 of a remedial constructive trust must point
to some other basis on which this remedy can be
imposed, like breach of fiduciary duty.3

[34] I now turn to consider Michelle’s claim in
unjust enrichment.

A. Unjust Enrichment

[35] Broadly speaking, the doctrine of unjust enrichment
 applies when a defendant receives a benefit
from a plaintiff in circumstances where it would
be “against all conscience” for him or her to retain
 that benefit. Where this is found to be the case,
the defendant will be obliged to restore that benefit
 to the plaintiff. As recognized by McLachlin J.
in Peel (Regional Municipality) v. Canada, [1992]
3 S.C.R. 762, at p. 788, “At the heart of the doctrine
of unjust enrichment . . . lies the notion of restora-
tion of a benefit which justice does not permit one
to retain.”

3
    Whether the availability of a remedial constructive trust is limited
    to cases involving unjust enrichment or wrongful acts need not
    be decided in the present case (see para. 95).
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


[36] Historically, restitution was available to plaintiffs
 whose cases fit into certain recognized “categories
 of recovery” — including where a plaintiff
conferred a benefit on a defendant by mistake, under
compulsion, out of necessity, as a result of a failed
or ineffective transaction, or at the defendant’s re-
quest (Peel, at p. 789; Kerr, at para. 31). Although




these discrete categories exist independently of one
another, they are each premised on the existence of
some injustice in permitting the defendant to retain
the benefit that he or she received at the plaintiff’s
expense.

[37] In the latter half of the 20th century, courts began
 to recognize the common principles underlying
these discrete categories and, on this basis, developed
“a framework that can explain all obligations arising
from unjust enrichment” (L. Smith, “Demystifying
Juristic Reasons” (2007), 45 Can. Bus. L.J. 281, at
p. 281; see also Rathwell v. Rathwell, [1978] 2 S.C.R.
436, and Murdoch v. Murdoch, [1975] 1 S.C.R. 423,
per Laskin J., dissenting). Under this principled
framework, a plaintiff will succeed on the cause of
action in unjust enrichment if he or she can show:
(a) that the defendant was enriched; (b) that the plaintiff
 suffered a corresponding deprivation; and (c) that
the defendant’s enrichment and the plaintiff’s corresponding
 deprivation occurred in the absence of a juristic
 reason (Pettkus v. Becker, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 834,
at p. 848; Garland, at para. 30; Kerr, at paras. 30‑45).
While the principled unjust enrichment framework
and the categories coexist (Kerr, at paras. 31‑32),
the parties in this case made submissions only under
the principled unjust enrichment framework. These
reasons proceed on this basis.

[38] This principled approach to unjust enrichment
 is a flexible one that allows courts to identify
circumstances where justice and fairness require
one party to restore a benefit to another. Recovery
is therefore not restricted to cases that fit within the
categories under which the retention of a conferred
benefit was traditionally considered unjust (Kerr,
324


at para. 32). As observed by McLachlin J. in Peel
(at p. 788):

    The tri-partite principle of general application which
this Court has recognized as the basis of the cause of action
for unjust enrichment is thus seen to have grown out of the
traditional categories of recovery. It is informed by them.




It is capable, however, of going beyond them, allowing
the law to develop in a flexible way as required to meet
changing perceptions of justice.

[39] Justice and fairness are at the core of the dispute
 between Michelle and Risa, both of whom are
innocent parties. Moreover, and to complicate matters
, resolution of this dispute requires this Court
to consider the elements of an unjust enrichment
claim as they apply in a context that involves several
 parties. Pursuant to her Oral Agreement with
Lawrence, Michelle paid around $7,000 in premiums
to the Insurance Company between 2000 and 2013
in exchange for the right to remain named as beneficiary
 of the policy. When Lawrence passed away,
however, the insurance proceeds (which totalled
$250,000) were payable by the Insurance Company
not to Michelle, but to Risa — the person whom
Lawrence had subsequently named the irrevocable
beneficiary, contrary to the contractual obligation he
owed to Michelle. The result of this arrangement was
that Risa’s enrichment was significantly greater than
Michelle’s out‑of-pocket loss. Moreover, Risa was
entitled to receive the proceeds from the Insurance
Company by virtue of her designation as irrevocable
 beneficiary, pursuant to ss. 190 and 191 of the
Insurance Act.

[40] These unusual circumstances raise two distinct
 questions respecting the law of unjust enrichment
. First, what is the proper measure of Michelle’s
deprivation, and in what sense does it “correspond”
to Risa’s gain? Second, does the legislative framework
 at issue provide a juristic reason for Risa’s
enrichment and Michelle’s corresponding deprivation
 — and if not, can such a juristic reason be found
on some other basis? I will deal with each of these
questions in turn.
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


  (1) Risa’s Enrichment and Michelle’s Corresponding Deprivation

[41] The first two elements of the cause of action
in unjust enrichment require an enrichment of the
defendant and a corresponding deprivation of the
plaintiff. These two elements are closely related; a




straightforward economic approach is taken to both
of them, with moral and policy considerations instead
 coming into play at the juristic reason stage of
the analysis (Kerr, at para. 37; Garland, at para. 31).
To establish that the defendant was enriched and
the plaintiff correspondingly deprived, it must be
shown that something of value — a “tangible benefit
” — passed from the latter to the former (Kerr,
at para. 38; Garland, at para. 31; Peel, at p. 790;
Pacific National Investments Ltd. v. Victoria (City),
2004 SCC 75, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 575, at para. 15). This
Court has described the enrichment and detriment
elements as being “the same thing from different
perspectives” (Professional Institute of the Public
Service of Canada v. Canada (Attorney General),
2012 SCC 71, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 660 (“PIPSC”), at
para. 151) and thus as being “essentially two sides
of the same coin” (Peter, at p. 1012).

[42] The parties in the present case do not dispute
the fact that Risa was enriched to the full extent of
the $250,000 by virtue of her right to receive the
insurance proceeds as the designated irrevocable
beneficiary. The application judge found as much (at
para. 27), and this finding is not contested on appeal.

[43] In addition to an enrichment of the defendant,
a plaintiff asserting an unjust enrichment claim must
also establish that he or she suffered a corresponding
deprivation. According to Professor McInnes, this element
 serves the purpose of identifying the plaintiff
as the person with standing to seek restitution against
an unjustly enriched defendant (M. McInnes, The
Canadian Law of Unjust Enrichment and Restitution
(2014), at p. 149; see also Peel, at pp. 789‑90, and
Kleinwort Benson Ltd. v. Birmingham City Council,
[1997] Q.B. 380 (C.A.), at pp. 393 and 400). Even
if a defendant’s retention of a benefit can be said to
be unjust, a plaintiff has no right to recover against
that defendant if he or she suffered no loss at all, or
326


suffered a loss wholly unrelated to the defendant’s
gain. Instead, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the
loss he or she incurred corresponds to the defendant’s
gain, in the sense that there is some causal connection
 between the two (Pettkus, at p. 852). Put simply,
the transaction that enriched the defendant must also
have caused the plaintiff’s impoverishment, such




that the defendant can be said to have been enriched
at the plaintiff’s expense (P. D. Maddaugh and J. D.
McCamus, The Law of Restitution (loose-leaf ed.),
at p. 3‑24). While the nature of the correspondence
between such gain and loss may vary from case to
case, this correspondence is what grounds the plaintiff
’s entitlement to restitution as against an unjustly
enriched defendant. Professor McInnes explains that
“the Canadian conception of a ‘corresponding deprivation
’ rightly emphasizes the crucial connection
between the defendant’s gain and the plaintiff’s loss”
(The Canadian Law of Unjust Enrichment and Restitution, at p. 149).

[44] The authorities on this point make clear that
the measure of the plaintiff’s deprivation is not limited
 to the plaintiff’s out‑of-pocket expenditures or
to the benefit taken directly from him or her. Rather,
the concept of “loss” also captures a benefit that was
never in the plaintiff’s possession but that the court
finds would have accrued for his or her benefit had
it not been received by the defendant instead (Citadel General Assurance Co. v. Lloyds Bank Canada,
[1997] 3 S.C.R. 805, at para. 30). This makes sense
because in either case, the result is the same: the defendant
 becomes richer in circumstances where the
plaintiff becomes poorer. As was succinctly articu-
lated by La Forest J. in Lac Minerals Ltd. v. International Corona Resources Ltd., [1989] 2 S.C.R. 574,
at pp. 669‑70:

When one talks of restitution, one normally talks of giving
back to someone something that has been taken from them
(a restitutionary proprietary award), or its equivalent value
(a personal restitutionary award). As the Court of Appeal
noted in this case, [the respondent] never in fact owned
the [disputed] property, and so it cannot be “given back”
to them. However, there are concurrent findings below that
but for its interception by [the appellant], [the respondent]
would have acquired the property. In Air Canada . . . , at
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


pp. 1202‑03, I said that the function of the law of restitution
 “is to ensure that where a plaintiff has been deprived
of wealth that is either in his possession or would have
accrued for his benefit, it is restored to him. The measure
 of restitutionary recovery is the gain the [defendant]
made at the [plaintiff’s] expense.” (Emphasis added.) In
my view the fact that [the respondent in this case] never
owned the property should not preclude it from the pur-




suing a restitutionary claim: see Birks, An Introduction to
the Law of Restitution, at pp. 133‑39. [The appellant] has
therefore been enriched at the expense of [the respondent].
[Emphasis in original.]

While Lac Minerals turned largely on the defendant
’s breach of confidence and breach of fiduciary
duty, the above comments were made in the context
of La Forest J.’s analysis of the tripartite unjust enrichment
 framework as it was applied in that case.
My view is thus that these comments are applicable
to the analysis in the present case.

[45] The foregoing also indicates that the corresponding
 deprivation element does not require
that the disputed benefit be conferred directly by
the plaintiff on the defendant (see McInnes, The
Canadian Law of Unjust Enrichment and Restitution,
at p. 155, but also see pp. 156‑83; Maddaugh and
McCamus, The Law of Restitution, at p. 35‑1). This
understanding of the correspondence between loss
and gain has also been accepted under Quebec’s
civilian approach to the law of unjust enrichment:

The theory of unjustified enrichment does not require
that the enrichment pass directly from the property of
the impoverished to that of the enriched party . . . . The
impoverished party looks to the one who profited from its
impoverishment. It is then for the enriched party to find a
legal justification for its enrichment.

(Cie Immobilière Viger Ltée v. Lauréat Giguère Inc.,
[1977] 2 S.C.R. 67, at p. 79; see also Lacroix v.
Valois, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1259, at pp. 1278‑79.)

[46] Taking a straightforward economic approach
to the enrichment and corresponding deprivation
elements of the unjust enrichment framework, I am
of the view that Michelle stands deprived of the right
to receive the entirety of the policy proceeds (for a
328


value of $250,000) and that the necessary correspondence
 exists between this deprivation and Risa’s
gain. With respect to the extent of Michelle’s deprivation
, my view is that the quantification of her loss
should not be limited to her out‑of-pocket expenditures
 — that is, the $7,000 she paid in premiums
between 2000 and 2013. Pursuant to her contractual




obligation, she made those payments over the course
of 13 years in exchange for the right to receive the
policy proceeds from the Insurance Company upon
Lawrence’s death. In breach of his contractual obligation
, however, Lawrence instead transferred that
right to Risa. Had Lawrence held up his end of the
bargain with Michelle, rather than designating Risa
irrevocably, the right to payment of the policy proceeds
 would have accrued to Michelle. At the end of
the day, therefore, what Michelle lost is not only the
amount she paid in premiums. She stands deprived
of the very thing for which she paid — that is, the
right to claim the $250,000 in proceeds.

[47] To be clear, therefore, Michelle’s entitlement
under the Oral Agreement is what makes it such that
she was deprived of the full value of the insurance
payout. In other cases where the plaintiff has some
general belief that the insured ought to have named
him or her as the designated beneficiary, but otherwise
 has no legal or equitable right to be treated as
the proper recipient of the insurance money, it will
likely be impossible to find either that the right to
receive that insurance money was ever held by the
plaintiff or that it would have accrued to him or her.
In such cases, the properly designated beneficiary is
not enriched at the expense of a plaintiff who had no
claim to the insurance money in the first place — the
result being that the plaintiff will not have suffered
a corresponding deprivation to the full extent of the
insurance proceeds (Love v. Love, 2013 SKCA 31,
359 D.L.R. (4th) 504, at para. 42).

[48] My colleagues, Gascon and Rowe JJ., approach
 Michelle’s loss differently. They take the
position that unjust enrichment cannot be invoked
by a claimant to protect his or her “contractual expectations
 against innocent third parties” (para. 104).
While they agree that the Canadian principle against
unjust enrichment operates where a plaintiff has lost
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


wealth that was either in his or her possession or that
would have accrued for his or her benefit, they take
the position that “awards for expected property have
generally been where there was a breach of an equitable
 duty”, and they distinguish that situation from
cases where the plaintiff held “a valid contractual expectation
” of receiving certain property (para. 104).




[49] My view is that it is not useful, in the context
 of unjust enrichment, to distinguish between
expectations based on a contractual obligation and
expectations where there was a breach of an equitable
 duty (see my colleagues’ reasons, at para. 104).
Rather, a robust approach to the corresponding deprivation
 element focuses simply on what the plaintiff
actually lost — that is, property that was in his or
her possession or that would have accrued for his or
her benefit — and on whether that loss corresponds
to the defendant’s enrichment, such that we can say
that the latter was enriched at the expense of the former
. As was observed by Professors Maddaugh and
McCamus in The Law of Restitution, one source of
difficulty in these kinds of disappointed beneficiary
cases is

a rigid application of the “corresponding deprivation”
or “expense” element as if it requires that the benefit in
the defendant’s hands must have been transferred from,
or constitute an out‑of-pocket expense of, the plaintiff
. . . . [R]estitution of benefits received from third parties
may well provide a basis for recovery. In this particular
context, the benefit received can, in any event, normally be
described as having been received at the plaintiff’s expense
in the sense that, but for the mistaken failure to implement
the arrangements in question, the benefit would have been
received by the plaintiff. [Emphasis added; p. 35‑21.]

I agree. In this case, given the fact that Michelle held
up her end of the bargain, kept the policy alive by
paying the premiums, did not predecease Lawrence,
and still did not get what she actually contracted
for, it seems artificial to suggest that her loss was
anything less than the right to receive the entirety of
the insurance proceeds.
330


[50] From this perspective, it is equally clear that
Risa’s enrichment came at Michelle’s expense. It
is not only that Michelle’s payment of the premiums
 made Risa’s enrichment possible — something
which the application judge found to be the case:
“The change of designation, and [Risa’s] later receipt
of the proceeds of the Policy, would not have been




possible but for [Michelle’s] performance of her
obligations under the agreement” (para. 48). What is
more significant is that Risa’s designation gave her
the statutory right to receive the insurance proceeds,
the necessary implication being that Michelle would
have no such right despite the fact that she had a contractual
 entitlement, by virtue of the agreement with
Lawrence, to remain named as beneficiary. Because
Risa received the benefit that otherwise would have
accrued to Michelle, the requisite correspondence
exists: the former was enriched at the expense of
the latter.

[51] My colleagues also dispute this proposition.
They say that any deprivation suffered by Michelle
is attributable to the fact that she lacks the practical
ability to recover anything against Lawrence’s insolvent
 estate. The result, in their view, is that what
Risa received — a statutory entitlement to the proceeds
 — is different than what Michelle lost — which
they characterize as the ability to enforce her contractual
 rights against Lawrence’s estate (para. 111).
Again, I disagree; since Risa was given the very thing
that Michelle had contracted to receive and was oth‑
erwise entitled to receive (given that she held up her
end of the bargain), it seems evident to me that Risa
was enriched at Michelle’s expense. To be clear, it
is not simply that Risa gained a benefit with a value
equal to the amount of Michelle’s deprivation. Rather,
what Risa gained is the precise benefit that Michelle
lost: the right to receive the proceeds of Lawrence’s
life insurance policy. I would also add that the insolvency
 of Lawrence’s estate simply means that
Michelle would be unable to recover the value of her
loss by bringing an action against Lawrence’s estate
in breach of contract; it does not affect her ability to
bring an unjust enrichment claim against Risa. The
fact that a plaintiff has a contractual claim against one
defendant does not preclude the plaintiff from ad-
vancing his or her case by asserting a separate cause
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


of action against another defendant if it appears most
advantageous (Central Trust Co. v. Rafuse, [1986]
2 S.C.R. 147, at p. 206).




[52] I would therefore conclude that the requisite
enrichment and corresponding deprivation are both
present in this case. The payability of the insurance
proceeds by the Insurance Company for Risa’s benefit
 did in fact impoverish Michelle “to the full extent
of the insurance payout in [Risa’s] favour” (Court
of Appeal decision, at para. 208 (Lauwers J.A., dissenting
)).

[53] In light of this, the Court of Appeal’s order —
which was made on the consent of the parties, and
which requires that $7,000 of the proceeds be paid to
Michelle and that the balance be paid to Risa — cannot
 be upheld on a principled basis. If there is a
juristic reason for Risa’s retention of the insurance
money, then Michelle’s claim will necessarily fail
and Risa will be entitled to the full $250,000. If there
is no such juristic reason, however, then Michelle’s
unjust enrichment claim will succeed and she will
be entitled to a restitutionary remedy totalling that
amount.

  (2) Absence of Any Juristic Reason

[54] Having established an enrichment and a corresponding
 deprivation, Michelle must still show
that there is no justification in law or equity for the
fact that Risa was enriched at her expense in order
to succeed in her claim. As observed by Cromwell J.
in Kerr (at para. 40):

   The third element of an unjust enrichment claim is
that the benefit and corresponding detriment must have
occurred without a juristic reason. To put it simply, this
means that there is no reason in law or justice for the defendant
’s retention of the benefit conferred by the plaintiff,
making its retention “unjust” in the circumstances of the
case . . . . [Emphasis added.]
332


[55] This understanding of juristic reason is crucial
 for the purposes of the present appeal. The third
element of the cause of action in unjust enrichment
is essentially concerned with the justification for
the defendant’s retention of the benefit conferred
on him or her at the plaintiff’s expense — or, to put
it differently, with whether there is a juristic reason




for the transaction that resulted in both the defendant
’s enrichment and the plaintiff’s corresponding
deprivation. If there is, then the defendant will be
justified in keeping or retaining the benefit received
at the plaintiff’s expense, and the plaintiff’s claim
will fail accordingly. At its core, the doctrine of unjust
 enrichment is fundamentally concerned with
reversing transfers of benefits that occur without
any legal or equitable basis. As McLachlin J. stated
in Peter (at p. 990), “It is at this stage that the court
must consider whether the enrichment and detriment,
morally neutral in themselves, are ‘unjust’.”

[56] In Garland, this Court shed light on exactly
what must be shown under the juristic reason element
of the unjust enrichment analysis — and in particular
, on whether this third element requires that cases
be decided by “finding a ‘juristic reason’ for a defendant
’s enrichment” or instead by “asking whether
the plaintiff has a positive reason for demanding restitution
” (para. 41, citing Garland v. Consumers’ Gas
Co. (2001), 57 O.R. (3d) 127 (C.A.), at para. 105). In
an effort to eliminate the uncertainty between these
competing approaches, Iacobucci J. formulated a
juristic reason analysis that proceeds in two stages.

[57] The first stage requires the plaintiff to demonstrate
 that the defendant’s retention of the benefit
at the plaintiff’s expense cannot be justified on the
basis of any of the “established” categories of juristic
reasons: a contract, a disposition of law, a donative
intent, and other valid common law, equitable or
statutory obligations (Garland, at para. 44; Kerr,
at para. 41). If any of these categories applies, the
analysis ends; the plaintiff’s claim must fail because
the defendant will be justified in retaining the disputed
 benefit. For example, a plaintiff will be denied
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


recovery in circumstances where he or she conferred
a benefit on a defendant by way of gift, since there
is nothing unjust about a defendant retaining a gift
of money that was made to him or her by (and that
resulted in the corresponding deprivation of) the
plaintiff. In this way, these established categories
limit the subjectivity and discretion inherent in the




unjust enrichment analysis and help to delineate
the boundaries of this cause of action (Garland, at
para. 43).

[58] If the plaintiff successfully demonstrates that
none of the established categories of juristic reasons
applies, then he or she has established a prima facie
case and the analysis proceeds to the second stage. At
this stage, the defendant has an opportunity to rebut
the plaintiff’s prima facie case by showing that there
is some residual reason to deny recovery (Garland,
at para. 45). The de facto burden of proof falls on
the defendant to show why the enrichment should
be retained. In determining whether this may be the
case, the court should have regard to two considerations
: the parties’ reasonable expectations and public
policy (Garland, at para. 46; Kerr, at para. 43).

[59] This two-stage approach to juristic reason
was designed to strike a balance between the need
for predictability and stability on the one hand, and
the importance of applying the doctrine of unjust
enrichment flexibly, and in a manner that reflects our
evolving perception of justice, on the other.

  (a) First Stage — None of the Established Categories Applies in These Circumstances

[60] The first stage of the Garland framework asks
whether a juristic reason from an established category
 operates to deny recovery. Michelle submits
that none of these categories applies in the circumstances
 of this case. Risa takes the position that the
Insurance Act required the proceeds of the policy to
be paid exclusively to her as the validly designated
beneficiary, such that the applicable legislation constitutes
 a juristic reason to deny the recovery sought
by Michelle.
334


[61] The main issue at this stage of the analysis is
therefore whether a beneficiary designation made
pursuant to ss. 190(1) and 191(1) of the Insurance
Act — which, when coupled with Lawrence’s insurance
 policy, makes it clear that Risa is the one to
whom the insurance proceeds are payable — provides
 a juristic reason for Risa to retain those proceeds




 in light of Michelle’s claim to the money. Put
differently, the question can be framed as follows:
is there any aspect of this statutory framework that
justifies the fact that Risa was enriched at Michelle’s
expense? If so, Michelle’s claim will necessarily fail.

[62] My colleagues dispute this proposition. In
their view, it is sufficient to show that there is some
juristic reason for the fact that the defendant was
enriched, and there is thus no need to demonstrate
that the enrichment and the corresponding depriva‑
tion occurred without a juristic reason. With respect,
this proposition is at odds with the clear guidance
provided by this Court in Kerr (para. 40, reproduced
at para. 54 of these reasons) and disregards the work
already done by the recognized categories of juristic
reasons identified in Garland. Each of these categories
 points to a relationship between the plaintiff
and the defendant that justifies the fact that a benefit
 passed from the former to the latter. To focus
exclusively on the reason why the defendant was
enriched is to ignore this key aspect of the law of
unjust enrichment.

[63] Two categories of juristic reasons might be
said to apply in the circumstances of this case: disposition
 of law and statutory obligations. Disposition
of law is a broad category that applies in various
circumstances, including “where the enrichment of
the defendant at the plaintiff’s expense is required by
law, such as where a valid statute denies recovery”
(Kerr, at para. 41 (emphasis added)). The statutory
obligations category operates in a substantially similar
 manner, precluding recovery where a legislative
enactment expressly or implicitly mandates a transfer
 of wealth from the plaintiff to the defendant.
Although there is undoubtedly a degree of overlap
between these two distinct categories, what matters
for the purposes of this appeal is that a plaintiff’s
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


claim will necessarily fail if a legislative enactment
provides a reason for the enrichment and corresponding
 deprivation, so as to preclude recovery in unjust
enrichment. As Professors Maddaugh and McCamus
note in The Law of Restitution:





. . . it is perhaps self-evident that an unjust enrichment
will not be established in any case where enrichment of
the defendant at the plaintiff’s expense is required by law.
The payment of validly imposed taxes may be considered
unjust by some but their payment gives rise to no restitutionary
 right of recovery. [Emphasis added; footnotes
omitted; p. 3‑28.]

[64] The jurisprudence provides ample support
for this proposition. Among the issues in Reference
re Goods and Services Tax, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 445
(“GST Reference”), was whether suppliers registered
under the Excise Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. E‑15, that
incurred costs in collecting the Goods and Services
Tax on behalf of the federal government could recover
 those costs from the government on the basis of
restitution. For a majority of this Court, Lamer C.J.
answered this question in the negative:

Under the GST Act the expenses involved in collecting
and remitting the GST are borne by registered suppliers
. This certainly constitutes a burden to these suppliers
and a benefit to the federal government. However, this
is precisely the burden contemplated by statute. Hence,
a juridical reason for the retention of the benefit by the
federal government exists unless the statute itself is ultra
vires. [Emphasis added; p. 477.]

[65] A similar issue arose in Gladstone v. Canada
(Attorney General), 2005 SCC 21, [2005] 1 S.C.R.
325. In that case, the respondents were charged under
the Fisheries Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. F‑14, for harvest-
ing and attempting to sell large quantities of herring
spawn. The Department of Fisheries and Oceans
seized and sold the herring spawn, and the appellant
Crown in Right of Canada held the proceeds pending
336


the outcome of the proceedings. The proceedings
were eventually stayed and the net proceeds paid to
the respondents. Because the Crown refused to pay
interest or any other additional amount, however,
the respondents sought restitution in the amount of
$132,000, on the ground that the Crown had been unjustly
 enriched by its retention of the proceeds during




the time of seizure. Writing for a unanimous Court,
Major J. denied that claim on the following basis:

    Here, Parliament has enacted a statutory regime to reg-
ulate the commercial fishery. It has provided an extensive
framework dealing with the seizure and return of things
seized. This regime specifically provides for the return of
any fish, thing, or proceeds realized. This was followed.
Interest or some other additional amount might have been
gratuitously included, but it was not. The validity of the
Fisheries Act was not, nor could have been, successfully
challenged. Therefore, the Act provides a juristic reason
for any incidental enrichment which may have occurred
in its operation. As a result, the unjust enrichment claim
fails. [para. 22]

In short, it was Major J.’s position that the statutory
regime, by specifying what had to be returned, made
it clear that anything falling outside of the specified
categories was to be retained by the Crown. In other
words, the Fisheries Act stipulated that, in certain
circumstances, a benefit would be retained by the
Crown.

[66] These cases are examples of situations where
a statute precluded recovery on the basis of unjust
enrichment. It is to be noted that in each case, recovery
 was denied because the legislation in question
 expressly or implicitly required the transfer of
wealth between the plaintiff and the defendant and
therefore justified the defendant’s retention of the
benefit received at the plaintiff’s expense. It is in this
way that the applicable legislation can be understood
as “denying” or “barring” recovery in restitution
and therefore as supplying a juristic reason for the
defendant’s retention of the benefit.

[67] What, then, should we make of ss. 190(1) and
191(1) of the Insurance Act? The former permits the
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


insured to identify the person to whom or for whose
benefit the insurance money is payable when the
insured passes away. Coupled with the insurance
contract, it directs the insurer to pay the proceeds
to the person so designated. The latter provides that
such a designation may be made irrevocably.




[68] Given the fact that a statute will preclude recovery
 for unjust enrichment where it requires (either
explicitly or by necessary implication) that the defendant
 be enriched to the detriment of the plaintiff,
the provisions of the Insurance Act may therefore
provide a juristic reason for the beneficiary’s enrichment
 vis‑à‑vis any corresponding deprivation
that may have been suffered by the insurer at the
time the insurance money is eventually paid out.
For this reason, an unjust enrichment claim brought
by the insurer against the designated beneficiary
(revocable or irrevocable) would necessarily fail at
this stage; the rights and obligations that exist in that
context — both statutory and contractual — justify
the beneficiary’s enrichment at the insurer’s expense
(Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corp. v. Deck, 2008
SKCA 21, 307 Sask. R. 206, at paras. 47‑54).

[69] A valid beneficiary designation under the Insurance Act has also been found to constitute a juristic
 reason that defeats a third party’s claim for the
entirety of the death benefit in circumstances where
that party paid some of the premiums under the erroneous
 belief that he or she was the named beneficiary
. In Richardson (Estate Trustee of) v. Mew,
2009 ONCA 403, 96 O.R. (3d) 65, the deceased had
maintained his first wife as the designated beneficiary
 under a life insurance policy. His second wife,
who did not have a contractual right to be named as
beneficiary, wrongly believed that he had executed a
change of beneficiary designation in her favour, and
paid some of the policy premiums — initially from
a joint bank account she shared with the deceased
and later from her own bank account. She sought the
imposition of a constructive trust in her favour over
the policy proceeds, arguing that there was no juristic
reason for the first wife’s enrichment. Even accepting
that the second wife could be said to have suffered
a corresponding deprivation, the Ontario Court of
338


Appeal upheld the motion judge’s finding that a
valid beneficiary designation under the Insurance
Act amounted to a juristic reason that defeated the
second wife’s claim for the insurance money that
was payable to the first wife. I would observe that the
claimant in that case sought a constructive trust over
the entire death benefit, and not merely the return of




any payments made on the basis of her erroneous
belief; the Court of Appeal did not decide whether
she would be entitled to the return of those payments,
and that question is not before us today.

[70] At issue in this case, however, is whether a
designation made pursuant to ss. 190(1) and 191(1)
of the Insurance Act provides any reason in law or
justice for Risa to retain the disputed benefit notwithstanding
 Michelle’s prior contractual right to
remain named as beneficiary and therefore to receive
the policy proceeds. In other words, does the statute
preclude recovery for a plaintiff, like Michelle, who
stands deprived of the benefit of the insurance policy
 in circumstances such as these? In my view, it
does not. Nothing in the Insurance Act can be read
as ousting the common law or equitable rights that
persons other than the designated beneficiary may
have in policy proceeds. As this Court explained in
Rawluk v. Rawluk, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 70, at p. 90, the
“legislature is presumed not to depart from prevailing
law ‘without expressing its intentions to do so with
irresistible clearness’” (see also Gendron v. Supply
and Services Union of the Public Service Alliance
of Canada, Local 50057, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1298). In
KBA Canada Inc. v. 3S Printers Inc., 2014 BCCA
117, 59 B.C.L.R. (5th) 273, for example, the British
Columbia Court of Appeal found that the Personal
Property Security Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 359, provided
 a “complete set of priority rules” that was “designed
 to replace convoluted common law, equitable
and statutory rules that beset personal property security
 law with complexity and uncertainty” (paras. 27
and 21, citing Bank of Montreal v. Innovation Credit
Union, 2010 SCC 47, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 3). In those
circumstances, there was no “room for priorities
to be determined on the basis of common law or
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


equitable principles” (para. 22). By contrast, while
the Insurance Act provides the mechanism by which
beneficiaries can be designated and therefore become
statutorily entitled to receive policy proceeds, no
part of the Insurance Act operates with the necessary
“irresistible clearness” to preclude the existence of
contractual or equitable rights in those insurance




proceeds once they have been paid to the named
beneficiary.

[71] The reasoning put forward by McKinlay J. (as
she then was) of the Ontario High Court of Justice
in Shannon v. Shannon (1985), 50 O.R. (2d) 456, is
particularly instructive in this regard. Like Michelle,
the plaintiff in Shannon was the former spouse of
an insured person who had contractually agreed to
maintain the plaintiff as the sole beneficiary of the
life insurance policy in his name and “not to revoke
such beneficiary designation at any time in the fu-
ture” (p. 458). Shortly thereafter, and in breach of his
contractual obligation, the insured person surreptitiously
 changed the beneficiary designation in favour
of his niece and nephew. He passed away several
years later, and when the plaintiff discovered the
change in beneficiary designation, she commenced
an action asserting her entitlement to the proceeds
of her former spouse’s insurance policy. McKinlay J.
found in her favour and made the following obser-
vations (at p. 461):

    It would appear from s. 167(2) [i.e. the predecessor of
s. 190(2) of the Insurance Act] that the insured may at any
time before the filing of an irrevocable declaration alter
or revoke an existing designation by way of a declaration.

   The position of the defendant is that this is precisely
what the insured did, and that any finding of the court of a
trust in favour of the plaintiff would have the effect of the
court’s attempting to overrule a clear statutory provision.

   But the Insurance Act provides a statutory framework for
the protection of the insured, the insurer and beneficiaries;
340


equity imposes duties of conscience on parties based on
their relationship and dealings one with another outside the
purview of the statute. When he concluded the separation
agreement with his wife, the deceased bound himself to
maintain the policy in good standing, which he did; he also
bound himself to maintain it for the benefit of his wife,
which he did not. [Emphasis added.]




[72] Shannon therefore supports the proposition
that while the Insurance Act may provide for the
beneficiary’s entitlement to payment of the proceeds,
it “does not specifically preclude the existence of
rights outside its provisions” (p. 461). Similarly,
in Chanowski v. Bauer, 2010 MCBA 96, 258 Man.
R. (2d) 244, the Manitoba Court of Appeal recognized
 that courts have readily accepted that contractual
 rights to policy proceeds may operate to the
detriment of named beneficiaries:

    Generally, the courts have imposed remedial constructive
 trusts in factual circumstances where the deceased has
breached an agreement regarding life insurance benefits.
These have arisen most commonly in cases where the
husband executed a separation agreement promising to
retain his former wife as the beneficiary of his life insurance
 policy and, in contravention of that promise, before
his death, the deceased changed the designation of his
beneficiary to that of his present wife or another family
member. [para. 39]

[73] Accepting that contractual rights to claim policy
 proceeds can exist outside of the Insurance Act,
can an irrevocable designation under the Insurance
Act nonetheless constitute a juristic reason for
Michelle’s deprivation? In my view, it cannot. This
is because the applicable statutory provisions do not
require, either expressly or implicitly, that a beneficiary
 keep the proceeds as against a plaintiff, in an
unjust enrichment claim, who stands deprived of his
or her prior contractual entitlement to claim such
proceeds upon the insured’s death. By not ousting
prior contractual or equitable rights that third parties
may have in such proceeds, the Insurance Act allows
an irrevocable beneficiary to take insurance money
that may be subject to prior rights and therefore does
not give such a beneficiary any absolute entitlement
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


to that money (Shannon, at p. 461). Put simply, the
statute required that the Insurance Company pay
Risa, but it did not give Risa a right to keep the
proceeds as against Michelle, whose contract with
Lawrence specifically provided that she would pay
all of the premiums exclusively for her own benefit.
Neither by direct reference nor by necessary implication




 does the statute either (a) foreclose a third
party who stands deprived of his or her contractual
entitlement to claim insurance proceeds by successfully
 asserting an unjust enrichment claim against
the designated beneficiary — whether revocable or
irrevocable — or (b) preclude the imposition of a
constructive trust in circumstances such as these (see
Central Guaranty Trust Co. v. Dixdale Mortgage
Investment Corp. (1994), 24 O.R. (3d) 506 (C.A.);
see also KBA Canada).

[74] On this basis, the applicable Insurance Act
provisions are distinguishable from other legislative
 enactments that have been found to preclude
recovery, such as valid statutory provisions requiring
 the payment of taxes to the government (see
GST Reference, at pp. 476‑77; Zaidan Group Ltd.
v. London (City) (1990), 71 O.R. (2d) 65 (C.A.), at
p. 69, aff’d [1991] 3 S.C.R. 593). In that context, the
plaintiff’s unjust enrichment claim must fail because
the legislation permits the defendant to be enriched
even when the plaintiff suffers a corresponding deprivation
. The same cannot be said about the statutory
framework at issue in this case, however; there is
nothing in the Insurance Act that justifies the fact
that Michelle, who is contractually entitled to claim
the policy proceeds, is nevertheless deprived of this
entitlement for Risa’s benefit.

[75] Moreover, in my view, the fact that Shannon
was decided prior to Soulos and Garland is of no
moment (Court of Appeal decision, at paras. 84 and
89). While those cases add to our understanding of
the law on constructive trusts and unjust enrichment,
they do not in any way undermine the holding in
Shannon with respect to the effect of the Insurance
Act in circumstances such as these.
342


[76] The majority below came to the opposite conclusion
 on this issue. Having considered the legislative
 regime governing beneficiary designations
in Ontario, Blair J.A. held that the Insurance Act
framework “lean[s] heavily in favour of payment of
the proceeds of life insurance policies to those named
as irrevocable beneficiaries, whereas it continues to




recognize the right of an insured, at any time prior
to such a designation, to alter or revoke a beneficiary
who does not fall into that category” (para. 83). On
this basis, he concluded that the legislative regime
under which Risa had been designated as the irrevocable
 beneficiary of Lawrence’s life insurance
policy supplied a juristic reason for her receipt of
the proceeds, since it constituted both a disposition
of law and a statutory obligation (para. 99).

[77] With respect, I disagree with two aspects of
Blair J.A.’s reasons. First, he framed the issue as
being whether the applicable Insurance Act provisions
, pursuant to which Risa had been designated as
irrevocable beneficiary, provided a juristic reason for
her receipt of the insurance proceeds (paras. 26(iii)
and 83). This, in my view, is the wrong perspective
from which to approach this third stage of the unjust
enrichment analysis. As stated above, the authorities
indicate that the court’s inquiry should focus not only
on why the defendant received the benefit, but also
on whether the statute gives the defendant the right to
retain the benefit against a correspondingly deprived
plaintiff — in this case, whether the Insurance Act
extinguishes an unjust enrichment claim brought by
a plaintiff at whose expense the named beneficiary
was enriched (GST Reference, at p. 477; Kerr, at
para. 31). And given the view expressed earlier in
these reasons, it seems to me that the Insurance Act
does not.

[78] Second, Blair J.A. placed a significant degree
of emphasis on the distinction between revocable and
irrevocable beneficiaries, and on the certainty and
predictability associated with the statutory regime
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


governing irrevocable designations. While it is clear
that an irrevocably designated beneficiary has a “statutory
 right to remain as the named beneficiary” and
is therefore “entitled to receive the insurance moneys
 unless he or she consents to being removed”
(para. 82), I am still not persuaded that s. 191 of the
Insurance Act can be interpreted as barring the pos-




sibility of restitution to a third party who establishes
that this irrevocable beneficiary cannot, in good conscience
, retain those monies in the face of that third
party’s unjust enrichment claim. To borrow the words
of Professors Maddaugh and McCamus, “the fact
that the insurer is directed by statute, implicitly if
not directly, to pay the insurance monies to the irrevocable
 beneficiary, does not preclude recovery by
the other intended beneficiary where retention of the
monies by the irrevocable beneficiary would constitute
 an unjust enrichment” (The Law of Restitution,
at p. 35‑16). Therefore, the fact that Risa was designated
 pursuant to s. 191(1) of the Insurance Act,
as opposed to s. 190(1), does not assist her against
Michelle in the circumstances of this case.

[79] I would also observe that the majority below
declined to “go so far as to say that the designation
 of a beneficiary as an irrevocable beneficiary
under the Insurance Act invariably trumps a prior
claimant” (para. 91), but nevertheless found that it
did in this case. It is with this latter statement that I
would disagree; as outlined above, my view is that
the statutory scheme does not prevent a claimant with
a prior contractual entitlement from succeeding in
unjust enrichment against the designated beneficiary.

[80] My colleagues take the position that the
Insurance Act provides a juristic reason for Risa’s
enrichment because it specifically provides that the
proceeds, once paid to the irrevocable beneficiary,
are immune from attack by the insured’s creditors
. They say that because “Michelle’s rights are
344


contractual in nature, she is a creditor of Lawrence’s
estate and thus, by the provisions of the Insurance
Act, has no claim to the proceeds” (para. 122). While
there is no dispute that Michelle may have a claim
against Lawrence’s estate, my view is that she is
also a person at whose expense Risa has been enriched
 — and therefore a plaintiff with standing to




claim against Risa in unjust enrichment. And while
the Insurance Act specifically precludes claims
by creditors suing on the basis of some obligation
owed by the insured’s estate, it does not state “with
irresistible clearness” that a claim in unjust en‑
richment — i.e. a claim based on a different cause
of action — brought by a plaintiff who also has
a contractual entitlement to claim the insurance
proceeds must necessarily fail as against the named
beneficiary.

[81] For all of the foregoing reasons, I would echo
the conclusion arrived at by Lauwers J.A., dissenting
in the court below, that “[Michelle’s] entitlement
to the insurance proceeds as against [Risa] is neither
 precluded nor affected by the operation of the
Insurance Act”, with the result that this case “falls
outside the category of disposition of law as a juristic
reason to permit [Risa] to retain the life insurance
proceeds” (para. 229).

[82] Since there is no suggestion that any other
established category of juristic reason would apply in
these circumstances, my conclusion at this first stage
is that Michelle has made out a prima facie case.

  (b) Second Stage — Policy Reasons Militate in
      Favour of Michelle

[83] The second stage of the juristic reason analysis
 affords the defendant an opportunity to rebut the
plaintiff’s prima facie case by establishing that there
is some residual reason to deny recovery. At this stage,
various other considerations come into play, like the
parties’ reasonable expectations and moral and policy-based arguments — including considerations relating
to the way in which the parties organized their relationship
 (Garland, at paras. 45‑46; Pacific National
Investments, at para. 25; Kerr, at paras. 44‑45).
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


[84] It is clear that both parties expected to receive
the proceeds of the life insurance policy. Pursuant to
the Oral Agreement, Michelle had a contractual right
to remain designated as beneficiary so long as she
continued to pay the premiums and kept the policy
alive for the duration of Lawrence’s life. Although
she could have better safeguarded her interests




by requiring Lawrence to designate her irrevocably
, her expectation with respect to the insurance
money — rooted in the Oral Agreement — is clearly
reasonable and legitimate.

[85] Risa, by contrast, expected to receive the insurance
 money upon Lawrence’s death by virtue
of the fact that she had been validly designated as
irrevocable beneficiary. Because Risa was designated
 after Lawrence and Michelle entered into the
Oral Agreement, however, I am of the view that her
expectation cannot take precedence over Michelle’s
prior contractual right to remain named as beneficiary
, regardless of whether Risa knew that this
was actually the case. To echo the findings of the
application judge:

While there is no evidence that [Risa] knew that [Michelle]
was paying the premiums on the Policy, she was aware
that [Lawrence] was not in a position to do so. She says
that she believed that [Lawrence’s] brother was paying the
premiums, but there is nothing in the record regarding the
brother’s motivation or intentions that would make [Risa’s]
belief in such action reasonable. [para. 49]

[86] Moreover, I am not persuaded that the oral nature
 of the agreement between Michelle and Lawrence
undermines Michelle’s expectation or serves as a
public policy reason that favours Risa’s retention of
the proceeds. The legal force of unwritten agreements
has long been recognized by common law courts. And
while “kitchen table agreements” may in some cases
result in situations where parties neither understand
nor intend the legal significance of their agreement,
this is not such a case; the parties do not dispute the
finding that Michelle and Lawrence did in fact have
an Oral Agreement that the former would pay the
premiums on the policy and, in exchange, would be
entitled to the proceeds of the policy upon the latter’s
death (Superior Court decision, at para. 17; Court of
Appeal decision, at para. 22). Indeed, the existence of
346


the Oral Agreement is quite clearly corroborated by
Michelle’s payment of the premiums following her
separation from Lawrence.

[87] As a final point, it appears to me that the residual




 considerations that arise at this stage of the
Garland analysis favour Michelle, given that her
contribution towards the payment of the premiums
actually kept the insurance policy alive and made
Risa’s entitlement to receive the proceeds upon
Lawrence’s death possible. Furthermore, it would be
bad policy to ignore the fact that Michelle was effectively
 tricked by Lawrence into paying the premiums
of a policy for the benefit of some other person of
his choosing.

[88] For the foregoing reasons, I would conclude that
Risa has not met the burden of rebutting Michelle’s
prima facie case. It follows, therefore, that Michelle
has made out each of the requisite elements of the
cause of action in unjust enrichment.

B. Appropriate Remedy: Imposition of a Constructive Trust

[89] The remedy for unjust enrichment is restitutionary
 in nature and can take one of two forms: personal
 or proprietary. A personal remedy is essentially
a debt or a monetary obligation — i.e. an order to
pay damages — that may be enforced by the plaintiff
 against the defendant (Sorochan v. Sorochan,
[1986] 2 S.C.R. 38, at p. 47). In most cases, this
remedy will be sufficient to achieve restitution, and
it can therefore be viewed as the “default” remedy
for unjust enrichment (Lac Minerals, at p. 678; Kerr,
at para. 46).

[90] In certain cases, however, a plaintiff may be
awarded a remedy of a proprietary nature — that is,
an entitlement “to enforce rights against a particular
piece of property” (McInnes, The Canadian Law of
Unjust Enrichment and Restitution, at p. 1295). The
most pervasive and important proprietary remedy
for unjust enrichment is the constructive trust — a
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


remedy which, according to Dickson J. (as he then
was),

is imposed without reference to intention to create a trust,
and its purpose is to remedy a result otherwise unjust. It




is a broad and flexible equitable tool which permits courts
to gauge all the circumstances of the case, including the
respective contributions of the parties, and to determine
beneficial entitlement.

(Pettkus, at pp. 843‑44)

[91] While the constructive trust is a powerful remedial
 tool, it is not available in all circumstances
where a plaintiff establishes his or her claim in unjust
enrichment. Rather, courts will impress the disputed
property with a constructive trust only if the plaintiff
can establish two things: first, that a personal remedy
would be inadequate; and second, that the plaintiff’s
contribution that founds the action is linked or causally
 connected to the property over which a constructive
 trust is claimed (PIPSC, at para. 149; Kerr,
at paras. 50‑51; Peter, at p. 988). And even where
the court finds that a constructive trust would be an
appropriate remedy, it will be imposed only to the
extent of the plaintiff’s proportionate contribution
(direct or indirect) to the acquisition, preservation,
maintenance or improvement of the property (Kerr,
at para. 51; Peter, at pp. 997‑98).

[92] The application judge concluded that Michelle
had established an entitlement to the entirety of the
proceeds of the life insurance policy on the basis
of unjust enrichment, and he accordingly ordered
that Risa held those proceeds on constructive trust
for Michelle (para. 52). He specifically found that
Michelle had demonstrated a “clear ‘link or causal
connection’ between her contributions and the proceeds
 of the Policy that continued for the entire duration
 of the Policy” (para. 50).

[93] While my analysis of Michelle’s right to
recover for unjust enrichment differs from that of
348


the application judge, I see no reason to disturb his
conclusion regarding the propriety of a remedial
constructive trust in these circumstances. Ordinarily,
a monetary award would be adequate in cases where
the property at stake is money. In the present case,
however, the disputed insurance money has been paid
into court and is readily available to be impressed




with a constructive trust. Furthermore, ordering that
the money be paid out of court to Risa, and then
requiring Michelle to enforce the judgment against
Risa personally, would unnecessarily complicate the
process through which Michelle can obtain the relief
to which she is entitled. It would also create a risk
that the money might be spent or accessed by other
creditors in the interim.

[94] Moreover, the application judge found that
Michelle’s payment of the premiums was causally
connected to the maintenance of the policy under
which Risa was enriched. Because each of Michelle’s
payments kept the policy alive, and given that Risa’s
right as designated beneficiary necessarily deprived
Michelle of her contractual entitlement to receive the
entirety of the insurance proceeds, I would impose a
constructive trust to the full extent of those proceeds
in Michelle’s favour.

[95] This disposition of the appeal renders it un-
necessary to determine whether this Court’s decision
in Soulos should be interpreted as precluding the
availability of a remedial constructive trust beyond
cases involving unjust enrichment or wrongful acts
like breach of fiduciary duty. Similarly, the extent
to which this Court’s decision in Soulos may have
incorporated the “traditional English institutional
trusts” into the remedial constructive trust framework
is beyond the scope of this appeal. While recognizing
that these remain open questions, I am of the view
that they are best left for another day.

VI. Conclusion

[96] I would therefore allow the appeal without
costs and order that the proceeds of the policy, with
accrued interest, be impressed with a constructive
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


trust in favour of Michelle and accordingly be paid
out of court for her benefit.

     The following are the reasons delivered by




     Gascon and Rowe JJ. (dissenting) —

I.

[97] This appeal is, without question, a difficult
one. Michelle and Risa are both innocent victims
of Lawrence’s breach of contract and they equally
invite substantial sympathy. Michelle paid approx-
imately $7,000 to keep alive an insurance policy
on the promise she would receive the proceeds if
Lawrence died within its term. Risa cared for and
supported Lawrence for 13 years and expected, as irrevocable
 beneficiary, that she would receive support
should he die. With Lawrence’s broken promise now
discovered, Michelle claims a constructive trust over
the proceeds on the basis of unjust enrichment or
“good conscience”, while Risa insists her irrevocable
beneficiary designation is unassailable.

[98] It is an unfortunate reality that a person’s
death is sometimes accompanied by uncertainty and
conflict over the wealth that has been left behind. The
resulting litigation can tie up funds that the deceased
intended to support loved ones for a significant period
 of time, adding financial hardship to personal
tragedy. In an attempt to ensure that life insurance
proceeds could be free from such strife, the Ontario
legislator empowered life insurance policy holders
to designate an “irrevocable beneficiary” (Insurance
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. I.8, s. 191(1)). Such a designation
 ensures that the policy proceeds could be
disbursed free from claims against the estate, giving
certainty to insured, insurer, and beneficiary alike.
This provision should be given full effect.
350


[99] There is no basis to impose a constructive
trust in the circumstances of this case. We agree
with Blair J.A. of the Ontario Court of Appeal that
Michelle has not established that a “good conscience”
constructive trust should be imposed (2017 ONCA
182, 134 O.R. (3d) 721). We rely on his reasons to
dispose of this ground of appeal. We also agree that




Michelle has failed to establish a claim in unjust
enrichment. On this issue, we respectfully part ways
with the majority of this Court on whether unjust
enrichment can be made out on these facts. Michelle
has only asserted contractual rights to the proceeds
and has not established a proprietary or equitable interest
 in the proceeds themselves. In our view, there is
no correlative deprivation between Michelle’s failed
contractual expectations and Risa’s enrichment. In
addition, the Insurance Act provides clear juristic
reason for any enrichment Risa could have received
through Michelle’s loss as a creditor of Lawrence’s
insolvent estate. Opening up irrevocable beneficiary
designations to challenges by an insured’s creditors
risks a recipe for litigation — a situation the legislator
clearly intended to avoid. As such, for the reasons that
follow, we would dismiss the appeal.

II. Analysis

A. Characterizing Michelle’s Claim

[100] The majority of the Ontario Court of Appeal
was correct in characterizing Michelle’s claim as
being that she had a contract with Lawrence for the
policy proceeds and that she was using this contract
to be entitled to restitution of the funds on the principle
 of unjust enrichment. According to Michelle’s
affidavit, the contract was to ensure that she would
be “entitled to receive the Policy benefits” in exchange
 for paying the premiums (A.R., at p. 138).
However, it is difficult to see how the contract she
has put into evidence creates a proprietary right in
the proceeds. Simply being named as a beneficiary
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


does not give one a right in the proceeds before the
death of the insured. The right to claim the proceeds
only crystalizes upon the insured’s death. Further,
as a revocable beneficiary, Michelle had no right to
contest the redesignation outside of a claim against
Lawrence for breach of contract. Thus, at the time
of Lawrence’s death, the only rights that Michelle




possessed in relation to the life insurance contract
were her contractual rights.

[101] On different pleadings and a more developed
record, Michelle may have been able to establish
that the contract gave her a proprietary interest in
the proceeds through an equitable assignment of
Lawrence’s chose in action. The Ontario Court of
Appeal correctly found that this avenue was never
properly put to the application judge, and Michelle
has not otherwise pursued this line of argument. It
follows that, with only contractual rights asserted,
Michelle cannot be understood to have a proprietary
right in the proceeds. Rather, her agreement with
Lawrence must be understood as limited to a contractual
 right to be maintained the named beneficiary of
the policy while she paid the premiums. If Lawrence
had died while she was designated as a beneficiary,
Michelle would consequently receive the proceeds,
but the contract itself cannot be seen to give Michelle
a right in the proceeds themselves.

[102] Of course, Lawrence breached his contractual
 obligations by redesignating Risa as an irrevocable
 beneficiary, entitling her to the policy proceeds
on his death. While Michelle would have a claim
against Lawrence’s estate for breach of contract, the
estate’s lack of assets has rendered any such recourse
fruitless. Instead, Michelle’s claim before this Court
is to reverse the purported unjust enrichment of Risa,
an innocent beneficiary of Lawrence’s breach of
contract.

[103] Risa has argued that unjust enrichment
should not be a vehicle for protecting expectation
interests in a valid contract. Indeed, the availability
of unjust enrichment for indirect claims against the
352


innocent beneficiaries of a breach of contract is a
matter of significant academic controversy. Professor
Birks, while a general proponent of the availability
of indirect claims, has posited that there is a general
rule against “leap-frogging” out of an initially valid
contract through unjust enrichment (P. Birks, Unjust
Enrichment (2nd ed. 2005), at p. 90). One reason he




suggests for this rule is that a contracting party “must
not wriggle round the risk of insolvency” inherent in
contractual relations (p. 90). Professor Burrows also
recognizes such a rule, given the logical difficulty
of establishing a causal link between the claimant’s
deprivation and the defendant’s benefit (A. Burrows,
The Law of Restitution (3rd ed. 2011), at pp. 70‑71).
In a similar vein, Professor Virgo has identified a
“privity principle” to unjust enrichment that means
indirect recipients of a benefit will generally not
be liable for restitution (G. Virgo, The Principles
of the Law of Restitution (3rd ed. 2015), at p. 105).
The leading text on restitution from Lord Goff and
Professor Jones, by contrast, suggests that there is
no such general prohibition and that causation can
be made out on a simple “but for” causation analysis
 (Goff & Jones: The Law of Unjust Enrichment
(9th ed. 2016), by C. Mitchell, P. Mitchell and S.
Watterson, at pp. 77 and 176). Yet, they also caution
that courts should be hesitant to make such awards
where they would have the effect of undermining an
insolvency regime or avoid the contractual allocation
of risk (p. 77).

[104] There is sparse Canadian authority on this
matter, and we see no support for the view that unjust
 enrichment protects an individual’s contractual
expectations against innocent third parties. Certainly,
this Court has recognized that the law of restitution
ensures that where a plaintiff has been deprived of
wealth that is either in their possession or would have
accrued for their benefit, it is restored to them (Air
Canada v. British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1161,
at pp. 1202‑3). However, restitution awards for expected
 property have generally been where there was
a breach of an equitable duty by a defendant (Lac
Minerals Ltd. v. International Corona Resources Ltd.,
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


[1989] 2 S.C.R. 574, at pp. 668‑70). In these cases, a
defendant, through some wrongdoing, intercepts the
property otherwise destined for the plaintiff. In the
words of Lac Minerals: “but for [the defendant’s]
interception”, the plaintiff “would have acquired
the property” (p. 669). Critically, the plaintiff has
no recourse against the third party. Its only claim




is to the very thing in the defendant’s hands. In our
view, this is distinguishable from where the plaintiff
holds a valid contractual expectation vis‑à‑vis the
third party (here, Lawrence) that they would receive
property, but that expectation was frustrated by an
insolvency that prevents full compensation for a
breach of contract. Our takeaway from Lac Minerals
is encapsulated concisely by Professor McInnes’
views on expected property awards:

The plaintiff is entitled to demand receipt of a benefit
which, as a matter of legal certainty, would have been
obtained from a third party, but for the defendant’s inter-
vention. The situation will be much different, however, if
relief is available merely because the defendant realized a
gain through the non-wrongful exploitation of an earning
opportunity. [Emphasis added.]

(M. McInnes, The Canadian Law of Unjust Enrichment and Restitution (2014), at p. 179)

To allow plaintiffs to wield contractual expectations
against innocent third parties risks “drift[ing] danger-
ously away from reversing unjustified transfers and
toward stripping non-wrongful profits” (McInnes,
at p. 183).

[105] Michelle has raised a number of so-called
“disappointed beneficiary” cases in support of her
claim. While many of these involved such indirect
claims for unjust enrichment, none support using
unjust enrichment to indirectly enforce a failed contractual
 expectation to receive policy proceeds. In
many of these cases, the insured was alleged to have
intended to redesignate the beneficiary but failed to
do so before they died (see, e.g., Love v. Love, 2013
SKCA 31, 359 D.L.R. (4th) 504, at para. 10; Holowa
354


Estate v. Stell-Holowa, 2011 ABQB 23, 330 D.L.R.
(4th) 693, at para. 14; Richardson (Estate Trustee
of) v. Mew, 2009 ONCA 403, 96 O.R. (3d) 65, at
para. 18; Roberts v. Martindale (1998), 55 B.C.L.R.
(3d) 63 (C.A.), at para. 17). Where courts have made
awards for unjust enrichment, it has been where
the defendant renounced their right to any benefit




(Holowa, at paras. 23 and 25; Roberts, at para. 26).
In our view, the defendant’s renunciation of rights to
the proceeds render these cases distinguishable and
of little assistance.

[106] More germane to this appeal are cases where
the insured redesignated the beneficiary in breach
of an equitable or legal obligation (see, e.g., Milne
Estate v. Milne, 2014 BCSC 2112, 54 R.F.L. (7th)
328, at para. 3; Ladner v. Wolfson, 2011 BCCA 370,
24 B.C.L.R. (5th) 43, at para. 3; Schorlemer Estate v.
Schorlemer (2006), 29 E.T.R. (3d) 181 (Ont. S.C.J.),
at para. 5; Steeves v. Steeves (1995), 168 N.B.R. (2d)
226 (Q.B.), at para. 29; Gregory v. Gregory (1994),
92 B.C.L.R. (2d) 133 (C.A.); Shannon v. Shannon
(1985), 50 O.R. (2d) 456 (H.C.)). In these cases,
courts have generally awarded the proceeds where
the insured was found to have been bound by an equitable
 obligation or where the insured’s rights were
otherwise held in trust for the plaintiff’s benefit. For
instance, in Schorlemer the insured had designated
the defendant as the beneficiary in breach of a written
 separation agreement, and the Ontario Superior
Court of Justice found that the insured’s rights were
held in trust for the plaintiff. Similarly, in Gregory,
Milne and Steeves, where the insured redesignated
the beneficiary in breach of a court order, the court
order was found to have imposed a trusteeship on the
insured for the benefit of the plaintiff. Shannon did
involve a broken contractual agreement; however,
as we detail below, we understand McKinlay J.’s
reasons as most consistent with having found that the
written separation agreement itself created a trust.
Regardless, the serious issues with enforcing contractual
 rights through unjust enrichment were not
given consideration in Shannon.
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


[107] As such, the present appeal presents this
Court with difficult questions about both the nature
of how a transfer of wealth is measured in unjust
enrichment and how such claims should be treated
in the juristic reason analysis. To be clear, we do
not wish to make any general statements regarding
so-called “leap-frogging” cases. But in applying the




facts of this case, as pled and proven, to the current
law of unjust enrichment, we remain unconvinced
that Michelle is entitled to a constructive trust for
the whole of the proceeds.

B. Corresponding Deprivation

[108] In an action for unjust enrichment, a plaintiff
must show that they suffered a corresponding deprivation
. To establish a corresponding deprivation,
there must be a transfer of wealth on a straightforward
 economic basis (Garland v. Consumers’ Gas
Co., 2004 SCC 25, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 629, at para. 35;
Peter v. Beblow, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 980, at p. 990).
While the clearest examples of such transfers are
where there is payment and receipt of money (e.g.
Garland, Air Canada), it can also be made out to
the extent of the plaintiff’s expenditure for the defendant
’s benefit (e.g. Peter) or where the defendant
has received property destined for the plaintiff but
for their wrongdoing (e.g. Lac Minerals). In these
types of cases, the issue of correspondence may
pass without comment, but the importance of this
structure must be kept firmly in mind when examin-
ing other cases where the nexus between the plaintiff
 and defendant is less obvious. Whatever factual
matrix gives rise to an apparent transfer of wealth
from the plaintiff to the defendant, it is crucial that
a defendant’s enrichment in fact corresponds to the
plaintiff’s deprivation. As explained by this Court
in Professional Institute of the Public Service of
Canada v. Canada (Attorney General), 2012 SCC
71, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 660, “the enrichment and detriment
 elements are the same thing from different perspectives
” (para. 151). Enrichment and deprivation
are “essentially two sides of the same coin” (Peter,
at p. 1012).
356


[109] The importance of the bilateral nature of unjust
 enrichment is highlighted by the fact that, unlike
for many other causes of action, unjust enrichment
will permit a plaintiff to recover from a defendant
without any wrongdoing on the latter’s part. For
example, a defendant will be liable to return to the
plaintiff any payments made to them by mistake.




Where liability attaches to the defendant without any
wrongdoing, the normative basis for such liability is
strictly limited. As Professor Smith explains:

Strict liability in unjust enrichment depends on both a
material gain to the defendant and a material loss to the
plaintiff. Moreover, the loss and the gain must be two
sides of the same coin; there must always be a transfer of
wealth from plaintiff to defendant. Only in this way can
we justify liability through a one-sided normative flaw
in the transaction. . . . Mere causal connection between
plaintiff and defendant is not enough — any more than
it is in negligence — because it does not carry enough
normative force.

(“Restitution: The Heart of Corrective Justice”
(2001), 79 Tex. L. Rev. 2115, at p. 2156)

The correspondence between the deprivation and the
enrichment, while seemingly formalistic, is fundamental
. Proper correspondence, Professor McInnes
notes, “is th[e] connection between the parties — a
plus and a minus as obverse manifestations of the
same event — that uniquely identifies the plaintiff
as the proper person to seek restitution” (p. 149).

[110] The logic that permits recovery in the circumstances
 of unjust enrichment also conditions
the measurement of any restitution. The defendant
cannot be required to “return” to the plaintiff more
than what they have received, even if the plaintiff
suffered a loss greater than the defendant’s gain. As
an innocent party, there is no basis to require the
defendant to return anything more. Inversely, the
plaintiff cannot collect more from the defendant than
they have lost. It does not matter that the defendant
benefited more than the plaintiff lost. The plaintiff
 only has standing in respect of losses they have
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


suffered. Liability for unjust enrichment is limited
to “the lesser of the two amounts, the enrichment or
the impoverishment” (Cie Immobilière Viger Ltée v.
Lauréat Giguère Inc., [1977] 2 S.C.R. 67, at p. 77,
cited in McIness, at p. 183).

[111] It is sufficiently clear that but for Michelle’s




payments, the policy would have lapsed, and but for
Lawrence’s breach of contract, she would have been
the beneficiary at the time of his death. But, in our
view, these facts are not enough to establish that the
deprivation and the enrichment are corresponding.
Risa’s enrichment was not at the expense of Michelle.
This is best illustrated by a hypothetical: suppose that
Lawrence’s estate was solvent. In that case, Risa
would have retained her enrichment — the insurance
proceeds — and Michelle would have suffered no
deprivation, as she would hold a cause of action for
breach of contract that is worth the equivalent of the
proceeds. How can there then be correspondence if
the enrichment and the deprivation could, in theory,
co-exist? Risa’s enrichment is not at the expense of
Michelle because Risa’s enrichment is not dependent
on Michelle’s deprivation. What Risa received (a
statutory entitlement to proceeds) is different from
Michelle’s deprivation (the inability to enforce her
contractual rights) — they are not “two sides of the
same coin”. It is not enough for Michelle’s impoverishment
 to be equal to Risa’s gain — they must be
“necessarily equal” such that it is a “zero-sum game”
(L. D. Smith, “Three-Party Restitution: A Critique of
Birks’s Theory of Interceptive Subtraction” (1991),
11 Oxford J. Leg. Stud. 481, at pp. 482‑83 (emphasis
added)).

[112] In this regard, we note that the majority seeks
to establish a correspondence between Risa’s enrichment
 and Michelle’s deprivation on the basis
that Michelle’s contributions to the premium payments
 kept the policy alive. But the fact that Michelle
preserved the policy does not inform whether her
deprivation corresponds to Risa’s enrichment. And
even if Michelle’s premium payments could generate
sufficient correspondence, Michelle’s deprivation
should be limited to the extent of her contributions,
not to her contractual expectations. Her deprivation
358


is not measured by the value of the agreement that
motivated her to pay the premiums. This principle
 is illustrated in this Court’s decision in Pacific
National Investments Ltd. v. Victoria (City), 2004
SCC 75, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 575. In that case, the appellant
 sought to uphold an unjust enrichment claim
against the City of Victoria for improvements it had




made to public works pursuant to an agreement with
the latter. The respondent city rezoned the appellant’s
development mid-project, which, the appellant argued
, undermined the reason for having made the
improvements. The fact that the appellant performed
the work as a result of an agreement did not change
the measure of the appellant’s deprivation. The appellant
’s measure of restitution was not its expected
profits under the agreement but rather only the cost
of performing the work, which was effectively given
gratuitously to the respondent. As such, even on
the majority’s understanding of correspondence,
Michelle’s claim should be limited to the return of
the premium payments.

[113] On our view of the matter, Michelle has not
established a corresponding deprivation between
Risa’s entitlement to the policy proceeds and her
failed contractual expectation to be named beneficiary
. As Risa has admitted liability for the approxi-
mately $7,000 in policy premiums, there is no need
for us to consider whether Michelle would have been
able to properly establish a corresponding deprivation
 for that amount.

C. Juristic Reason

[114] Even if a corresponding deprivation is as-
sumed, we do not come to the conclusion that Risa
was unjustly enriched at Michelle’s expense. This is
because there is a juristic reason for Risa’s enrichment
: the provisions of the Insurance Act.

[115] In Garland, this Court made a choice as to
the threshold for when a transfer of wealth should
be reversed. Prior to Garland, Canadian courts had
either followed this Court’s direction in Rathwell v.
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


Rathwell, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 436, which prescribed a
juristic reasons approach, or they applied the English
approach, searching for an unjust factor to reverse
an impugned transfer of wealth (Garland, at paras
. 40‑41). Faced with this division, Iacobucci J.
affirmed the “distinctive Canadian approach” to juristic
 unjust enrichment (para. 42). Along with his




clear preference for the juristic reason approach,
Iacobucci J. was responsive to the criticisms of it.
Recognizing the difficulty of proving a negative —
the absence of any juristic reason for a defendant’s
enrichment — Iacobucci J. formulated a two-stage
approach to juristic reasons. At the first stage of
the analysis, the plaintiff must show the absence
of a juristic reason from a closed list of established
categories. These include a disposition of law and a
statutory obligation, among others. If the plaintiff
establishes that there is no juristic reason from one
of the established categories, there is a prima facie
case for restitution. At the second stage of the analysis
, the defendant may rebut the prima facie case
by demonstrating that there is some other reason
to deny recovery. While courts should look to “all
of the circumstances of the transaction” in order to
determine whether recovery should be denied, they
are to have regard to two factors: “. . . the reasonable
expectations of the parties and public policy considerations
” (paras. 45‑46).

[116] While the test is intended to be flexible and
have the capacity to accommodate “changing perceptions
 of justice” (Garland, at para. 43; Peel (Regional Municipality) v. Canada, [1992] 3 S.C.R. 762,
at p. 788), it must be borne in mind that what prompted
this articulation of the test was the need “to ensure
that the juristic reason analysis was not ‘purely sub-
jective’, thereby building into the unjust enrichment
analysis an unacceptable ‘immeasureable judicial discretion
’ that would permit ‘case by case “palm tree”
justice’” (Kerr v. Baranow, 2011 SCC 10, [2011] 1
S.C.R. 269, at para. 43, citing Garland, at para. 40).
As such, the reasonable expectations of the parties and
public policy considerations must only be taken into
account at the second stage of the analysis, provided
360


that no established juristic reason is found (Kerr, at
paras. 44‑45). Simply put, if an established category of
juristic reason applies, the analysis ends and the claim
for unjust enrichment fails. Reasonable expectations
and public policy cannot oust an established category
of juristic reason where it is found to apply.





[117] The unique circumstances of Michelle’s restitutionary
 claim — being an indirect claim involving
third parties — demands a sharper examination of
the object of the juristic reason. That is, a juristic reason
 for what? The majority suggests at various points
that a juristic reason must simultaneously provide a
reason for the defendant’s enrichment, and a reason
why that enrichment must occur at the expense of
the plaintiff. It is this approach that appears to lead
the majority to place great weight on the distinction
between the receipt and retention of a benefit. We
remain unconvinced this is a helpful tack to take.
Rather, we would simply say that a juristic reason
need only provide reason for the defendant’s enrichment
, as has been consistently stated in past jurisprudence
 (Kerr, at para. 32; Garland, at para. 30; Soulos
v. Korkontzilas, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 217, at para. 66;
Pettkus v. Becker, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 834, at p. 848).

[118] One can readily see how this important aspect
 of juristic reason can be easily overlooked and
has been largely unaddressed. In the paradigmatic
cases of unjust enrichment where only two parties
are involved, and a transfer is made directly between
them, the questions of enrichment and impoverishment
 may be one and the same. For example, if a
transfer occurs by way of a gift from the plaintiff to
the defendant, the plaintiff’s donative intent is both
a juristic reason for the defendant’s retention of the
wealth, and a reason for the defendant’s enrichment
at the expense of the plaintiff. After all, it was the
plaintiff who intended the gift from their assets. In
our view, the fact that in many cases the juristic reason
 for the defendant’s enrichment simultaneously
explains why that enrichment occurs at the expense
of the plaintiff does not render this a requirement of
the test for unjust enrichment.
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


[119] The situation is of course very different
where multiple parties are involved and wealth is
not transferred directly from one to another. In these
cases, despite there being a reason that explains why
each person is entitled to a particular thing and why
another no longer is, it will be near impossible to
find an explanation that can simultaneously capture




both. The following example, while not a case of unjust
 enrichment, is instructive. A person who is given
a car could sell it to another, who bears no relation
to the original donor. The donor and purchaser are
in effect legal strangers. In these situations, demanding
 a reason that simultaneously explains why the
purchaser is entitled to the car and why the donor
is no longer entitled to it imposes an impossible
burden. Simply put, the reason the purchaser has
the car is not the same reason the donor doesn’t. The
legal relationships of these individuals are mediated
through other legal frameworks and actors and are
not amenable to a single explanation. If the unjust
enrichment analysis requires that juristic reasons
have this kind of explanatory power, plaintiffs will
almost always be successful in proving their absence
in cases involving multiple parties and indirect transfers
 of wealth.

  (1) The Insurance Act Establishes a Juristic Reason for Risa’s Enrichment

[120] In this case, the issue at the first stage of the
analysis is whether a beneficiary designation made
pursuant to ss. 190(1) and 191(1) of the Insurance
Act provides a juristic reason for Risa’s receipt and
retention of the insurance proceeds. Arriving at an
answer to this question requires an examination of
the provisions of the Insurance Act and the legal relationships
 surrounding the (alleged) transfer. In our
view, not only does the Insurance Act — in conjunction
 with the deceased’s policy — specifically direct
the payment of the proceeds to Risa, but it expressly
contemplates doing so even in light of the very kind
of claim advanced by Michelle.
362


[121] Section 191(1) of the Insurance Act provides
that an insured may designate an irrevocable beneficiary
 under a life insurance policy, and thereby
provide special protections to that beneficiary. From
the moment an irrevocable beneficiary is designated,
they have a right in the policy itself: the insurance
money is not subject to the control of the insured




or to the claims of his or her creditors and the beneficiary
 must consent to any subsequent changes to
beneficiary designation. As it is undisputed that Risa
was the validly designated irrevocable beneficiary of
the policy, Risa is entitled to the proceeds free of all
of the claims of Lawrence’s creditors. Simply put,
the direction of this comprehensive statutory scheme,
in conjunction with the deceased’s policy, constitutes
a juristic reason for Risa’s enrichment (Chanowski
v. Bauer, 2010 MBCA 96, 258 Man. R. (2d) 244;
Richardson; Love).

[122] The fact that Michelle had an agreement
with Lawrence for the proceeds of the policy does
not undermine the presence of this juristic reason.
As Michelle’s rights are contractual in nature, she
is a creditor of Lawrence’s estate and thus, by the
provisions of the Insurance Act, has no claim to
the proceeds. Indeed, the Insurance Act explicitly
protects irrevocable beneficiaries from the claims
of the deceased’s creditors. Section 191(1) provides
that where an insured designates an irrevocable beneficiary
, the insurance money “is not subject to the
control of the insured, is not subject to the claims of
the insured’s creditor and does not form part of the
insured’s estate”. Thus, contrary to the suggestion
of the majority, the Insurance Act does, with irresistible
 clarity, “preclude the existence of contractual
 . . . rights in those insurance proceeds” (Majority
Reasons, at para. 70 (emphasis added)). The French
version of s. 191(1) of the Act is equally clear stating
that the proceeds “ne peuvent être réclamées par les
créanciers de l’assuré et ne font pas partie de sa
succession”.

[123] The Insurance Act’s legislative history further
 supports Risa’s retention of the insurance proceeds
 notwithstanding Michelle’s claim. This history
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


illustrates that the provisions of the Insurance Act
were designed to protect the interests of beneficiaries
in retaining the proceeds, and provide no basis whatsoever
 for a person paying the premiums to assume
she would have any claim to the eventual proceeds.
From the earliest days, the purpose of insurance
statutes was in large part to securely provide for an




insured’s beneficiaries. In 1865, the then Province
of Canada (which included what is now Ontario)
passed legislation enabling any person to enter into
a contract to insure his life for the benefit of his wife
and children, with the proceeds free from the claims
of any of their creditors (An Act to secure to Wives
and Children the benefit of Assurances on the lives
of their Husbands and Parents, S. Prov. C. 1865, 29
Vict., c. 17, ss. 3 and 5). Subsequently in 1884, as
outlined in Risa’s factum, “the legislation permitted
a class of beneficiaries who were close family mem-
bers of the insured (later known as ‘preferred beneficiaries
’) to enforce the contract and to sue in their
own right. This was effected by means of a statutory
trust in favour of the preferred beneficiaries” (R.F.,
at para. 73; see also An Act to Secure to Wives and
Children the Benefit of Life Insurance, S.O. 1884,
c. 20, s. 5; E. H. McVitty, A Commentary on the
Life Insurance Laws of Canada (1962), at p. 36).
Subsequent versions of the insurance statutes in the
province also provided protection to “beneficiaries
for value”, people who gave valuable consideration
to the insured in exchange for designation as the
beneficiary (The Insurance Act, R.S.O. 1960, c. 190).
However, even under this regime, beneficiaries for
value were only protected if a written description of
the designation had been made (ss. 164(1) and 165).

[124] In 1962, significant principled changes were
made to the Insurance Act, including the abolition of
statutory trusts and beneficiaries for value (McVitty,
at pp. 36‑39 and 137‑38). Rather than protect beneficiaries
’ interests by means of a statutory trust, the
modern Insurance Act provided revocable beneficiaries
 with a statutory cause of action to enforce
insurance contracts for their own benefit against the
insurer (Insurance Act, s. 195). The modern Insurance Act also “shifted the regime away from granting
364


beneficiaries any control or proprietary interests in
the proceeds. The sole exceptions were those beneficiaries
 validly designated by the insured as irrevocable
 beneficiaries — a status newly introduced
in 1962 — and valid assignees” (R.F., at para. 75).
These changes to the insurance scheme in Ontario
represent the legislature’s continued intention to protect




 beneficiaries from the claims of the insured’s
creditors, and to underline that a beneficiary’s entitlement
 to the proceeds is not undermined by her status
as a “mere volunteer”. A beneficiary is not more or
less entitled on the basis of her contribution to the
policy’s premiums. The Insurance Act is deliberately
indifferent to the source of the premium payments,
and renders the actions of the payers irrelevant as far
as the beneficiaries are concerned.

[125] Of course, beneficiaries who pay the premiums
 are not left completely vulnerable by the Act.
These beneficiaries — like any beneficiary — can
secure their priority over the insurance proceeds by
requesting either designation as the irrevocable beneficiary
 of a policy, or requesting an assignment of the
policy. This allows a promisee to protect themselves
from the risk of contractual breach. Absent these
steps, there are no guarantees for beneficiaries who
pay premiums: the Insurance Act is explicitly and
deliberately indifferent to the source of the premium
payments.

[126] Consistent with the scheme, courts have declined
 to order restitution of insurance proceeds where
plaintiffs pay the policy premiums under the mistaken
 belief that they are the named beneficiary. In
Richardson, a plaintiff disputed the payment of her
husband’s insurance policy proceeds to his former
wife, the defendant, who had remained the named
beneficiary on the policy. The plaintiff argued that
she had paid the premiums of the policy under the
mistaken belief that she was in fact the named beneficiary
, and therefore, that the defendant was unjustly
enriched by the retention of the proceeds. The Ontario
Court of Appeal upheld the motion judge’s decision
denying the plaintiff’s claim in unjust enrichment. The
plaintiff’s contribution to the premium payments did
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


not render the defendant’s enrichment unjust. There
was a juristic reason for her enrichment: the designation
 of the defendant as the beneficiary of the policy.

[127] If we were to impose on juristic reasons




a requirement that they explain simultaneously a
defendant’s enrichment and a plaintiff’s loss, it is
unclear to us how the Insurance Act could then ever
constitute a juristic reason in a third-party dispute
relating to insurance proceeds. If plaintiffs can establish
 some correspondence in relation to a portion
of the proceeds — e.g. through mistaken premium
payments — the Insurance Act will likely never bar
their claim to unjust enrichment. In our view, this is
an especially troubling result in respect of the legislative
 history of the Insurance Act; it would undermine
a deliberate legislative choice to divorce entitlement
to the proceeds from the payment of the premiums.

[128] On the basis of this view of juristic reason,
the majority disagrees that the Insurance Act constitutes
 a juristic reason in this case. On their view,
this is because the Insurance Act does not explicitly
oust the prior contractual claims of third parties to
the policy proceeds. They rely on the Ontario High
Court of Justice’s decision in Shannon, finding that
it supports the proposition “that while the Insurance
Act may provide for the beneficiary’s entitlement to
payment of the proceeds, it ‘does not specifically preclude
 the existence of rights outside its provisions’”,
including contractual entitlements such as Michelle’s
(Majority Reasons, at para. 72).

[129] We agree with Blair J.A., that it is unclear
what proposition Shannon actually supports. In that
case, the plaintiff argued that the provisions of the
separation agreement became impressed with a trust,
and that the designation of other beneficiaries in
breach of that agreement constituted a disposition of
trust property. We would note that the only way the
designation of another beneficiary could constitute a
366


disposition of trust property is if the trust arose at the
time the agreement was concluded. Justice McKinlay
explained that it would be unjust for the “plaintiff’s
clear rights under an agreement with her husband for
good consideration [to] be taken away in favour of a
niece and nephew who have given no consideration
for those rights” (p. 461). She found that the proceeds




 of the insurance policy were impressed with
a trust in favour of the plaintiff. She did not specify
whether the trust was intentional (constituted at the
time of formation) or constructive (remedial). To the
extent the reasons suggest that the designation of
beneficiaries according to the Insurance Act does not
constitute a juristic reason because the beneficiaries
are mere volunteers, we reject this argument. The
very purpose of the Insurance Act is to distribute
the policy proceeds to beneficiaries because of their
designation as such, irrespective of their contribution
directly to premiums or to the insured.

[130] Instead, Shannon and the jurisprudence that
has followed can be understood to support the proposition
 that on the facts of a given case a separation
agreement can be found to create either a trust over,
or an equitable obligation in, the insurance proceeds.
Indeed, this is the proposition for which Shannon
is consistently cited. In Fraser v. Fraser (1995),
9 E.T.R. (2d) 136, the British Columbia Supreme
Court, citing Shannon, found that “the covenant to
maintain the beneficiary in the separation agreement
is tantamount to an irrevocable designation of the
beneficiary under the provisions of the Insurance
Act” (para. 18). In Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan
Board v. Ontario (Superintendent of Financial Services) (2004), 70 O.R. (3d) 61, the Ontario Court of
Appeal found that pre-retirement death benefits in a
vested Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan were validly
assigned to a former spouse of the plan member
under a separation agreement and that “a subsequent
spouse who marries after a valid assignment of a pre-retirement death benefit to a former spouse should
not reasonably expect to receive the already-assigned
interest” (para. 62 (emphasis added)). In Snider v.
Mallon, 2011 ONSC 4522, 3 R.F.L. (7th) 228, the
Ontario Superior Court, citing Shannon, declared
that “[i]t is therefore a well settled principle that
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


an undertaking in a separation agreement creates a
trust interest which will operate to protect the beneficiary
 should the undertaking party fail to honour
his or her commitment” (para. 13). So too in Bielny
v. Dzwiekowski, [2002] I.L.R. ¶I‑4018 (Ont. S.C.J.),
where the court found that the “law relating to the irrevocable
 designations of beneficiaries in separation




agreements has been settled for some time” (para. 8),
aff’d [2002] O.J. No. 508 (QL) (C.A.). Unlike these
cases, Michelle’s interest in the policy does not arise
from the contract itself, but from its breach.

[131] Therefore, we do not take Shannon to be
authority for the proposition that a prior agreement to
be designated the beneficiary of an insurance policy,
without more, is sufficient to undermine the operation
 of an established juristic reason. A contractual
entitlement is insufficient to create this kind of interest
 in the policy or its proceeds. This principle is illustrated
 in Milne: prior to passing away, a deceased,
in breach of an order from a family law proceeding,
changed the beneficiary designation from the plaintiff
, his former spouse, to his current spouse. The
former spouse argued that as a result of the breach
of the order, which she likened to a contract in the
family law context, she was entitled to the proceeds.
The court found that while she was not entitled to
the proceeds, she was entitled to damages for the
contractual breach in the amount of the proceeds.
While this case differs from the present appeal in that
the estate’s solvency was not in issue, it is nonetheless
 instructive. Similarly, in Kang v. Kang Estate,
2002 BCCA 696, 44 C.C.L.I. (3d) 52, the appellant
claimed that her husband promised to name her as the
designated beneficiary on his life insurance policy if
she came with him to Canada. She accompanied her
husband to Canada, but he retained his sister as the
designated beneficiary under his policy of life insurance
. The Court of Appeal rejected the appellant’s
claims, distinguishing the case from others in which
“trial judges have imposed a constructive trust to
remedy a husband’s breach of fiduciary duty owed to
his wife after separation” flowing from the covenant
368


in a separation agreement (para. 9). On its own, the
agreement was not sufficient to give the plaintiff any
entitlement to the proceeds, and ground a claim in
unjust enrichment.




[132] The majority attaches significance to the fact
that Michelle specifically contracted for the proceeds
of the policy. She continued to pay the policy’s premiums
 on this basis. Put another way, in the view of
the majority, Michelle is not an ordinary creditor of
Lawrence’s estate; rather, she is in a special position
vis‑à‑vis the policy proceeds. Respectfully, we cannot
 agree that this changes the nature of Michelle’s
claim to the policy proceeds. In immunizing beneficiaries
 from the claims of the insured’s creditors,
the Insurance Act does not distinguish between types
of creditors. Creditors of the insured’s estate simply
do not have a claim to the insurance proceeds. There
is no basis to carve out a special class of creditor
who would be exempt from the clear wording of the
Insurance Act. Bearing in mind the history of the
relevant provisions of the Insurance Act and their
clarity, neither Michelle’s contributions to the policy,
nor her contract with Lawrence are sufficient to take
her outside the comprehensive scheme and grant her
special and preferred status.

[133] That being said, we do not dispute Blair J.A.’s
statement that the “designation of a beneficiary as an
irrevocable beneficiary under the Insurance Act [does
not] invariably trum[p] a prior claimant” (para. 91).
Whether the Insurance Act fails to trump a prior
claimant depends on the character of that prior claim.
Where by some agreement, or otherwise, the insured
has “placed the policy or its proceeds beyond his or
her ability to deal with them, and, therefore, beyond
his or her ability to make the purported irrevocable
 designation”, the Insurance Act will not constitute
 a juristic reason for a beneficiary’s enrichment
(para. 91). For example, if a claimant successfully
established the existence of a trust over the policy or
its proceeds prior to the designation of an irrevocable
beneficiary, her beneficial or proprietary interest in
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


the policy would have prevented the insured from
designating an irrevocable beneficiary. Any such
designation would be invalid. In those circumstances
the Insurance Act could not constitute a juristic reason
 for a defendant’s enrichment.





[134] But in the normal course, a contract between
two parties does not at the time of the contract formation
, be it for legal or equitable reason, prevent a
promisor from dealing with the property that is the
subject matter of the contract. In Ladner Estate, Re,
2004 BCCA 366, 40 B.C.L.R. (4th) 298, the British
Columbia Court of Appeal considered the appropriate
 remedy for the deceased’s breach of his covenants
in a separation agreement to pay permanent spousal
support to the appellant, and to maintain insurance to
secure payment of that support. Instead of acting in
accordance with the agreement, the deceased made
the insurance proceeds of his policies payable to his
estate, and thus available for estate administration
costs, and vulnerable to the claims of unsecured creditors
. The appellant argued that contract law does not
permit a party (or their estate) to gain an advantage
from wrongful conduct. The Court of Appeal was
unpersuaded, finding that a promisor’s wrongdoing
“does not confer a property right or priority on the
other party to the contract” (para. 23).

[135] This is indeed reflected in the reasons of
the majority, which acknowledge that in the regular
course, Michelle could pursue a remedy for breach of
contract against Lawrence’s estate. It is only because
Lawrence’s estate has no significant assets to satisfy
an order for payment that any claim is being made to
the insurance proceeds. As such, even on their view,
Michelle’s interest specifically in the policy proceeds
does not crystallize until Lawrence’s death, that is,
long after Lawrence designated Risa as the irrevocable
 beneficiary. Thus, contrary to Lauwers J.A.’s
dissenting reasons at the court below, the agreement
 did not place the policy or its proceeds beyond
Lawrence’s ability to deal with them.
370


[136] We note that the thrust of the cases on which
Michelle seeks to rely for her position recognize
either explicitly or implicitly that unjust enrichment
is available only where there is some proprietary or
equitable entitlement to the insurance proceeds. In
Steeves, the New Brunswick Queen’s Bench found
that the insured “held the inchoate proceeds of the




insurance policy in the event of his death in trust for
the plaintiff” (para. 36). In Schorlemer, the Ontario
Superior Court of Justice summarized the relevant
legal principles as follows: “. . . where an insured is
obligated under a separation agreement to designate
the other party or their children as a beneficiary,
that agreement will prevent the designation of another
 person as beneficiary . . .” (para. 48). These
cases confirm, in our view, that a claim in unjust
enrichment for the proceeds of a life insurance policy
cannot be rooted in a mere contractual entitlement.

[137] Still, the majority does not accept that the
Insurance Act’s clear bar of creditor claims against
beneficiaries is sufficient to oust Michelle’s claim
against Risa. While acknowledging that Michelle’s
breach of contract claim renders her a creditor of
Lawrence’s estate, they nonetheless insist that this
has no bearing on a potential claim in unjust enrichment
. Respectfully, we cannot agree. Framed in either
 contract or unjust enrichment, Michelle has not
shown a proprietary or equitable entitlement to the
proceeds. Michelle relies on her rights as a contractual
 creditor to anchor a claim in unjust enrichment.
In our view, the Insurance Act explicitly ousts claims
of this character.

[138] In sum, we consider that the Insurance Act
reflects a deliberate policy choice to channel the
insurance proceeds directly to the designated beneficiary
 free from any and all creditor claims. The Act is
a juristic reason for the transfer to Risa. The relevant
jurisprudence, including Shannon, does not dislodge
or undercut the clear statutory language. Instead, the
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


cases confirm that, absent some proprietary or equitable
 entitlement to the insurance proceeds, creditors
cannot use unjust enrichment claims to undermine
the Insurance Act and an insured’s valid designation.




  (2) Policy Considerations Weigh Against Allowing Michelle’s Claim for Unjust Enrichment

[139] Even if the Insurance Act, on its own, did not
establish a juristic reason for Risa’s enrichment, we
add that the policy considerations at the second stage
of the juristic reason analysis would nevertheless
favour the denial of restitution to Michelle.

[140] The legislature’s choice for intended beneficiaries
 to receive the proceeds is rooted in the sound
policy considerations underpinning that choice. Estate distributions are subject to frequent disputes,
leading to lengthy and expensive litigation. Tying up
insurance proceeds in litigation can create immense
hardship for beneficiaries, many of whom stare at
financial instability without support from their now-deceased spouse. Where there is a significant delay
between an insured’s death and the receipt of the
insurance proceeds, designated beneficiaries may
struggle to take care of household expenses or meet
basic needs. Such is the case with Risa.

[141] The Insurance Act is structured in large part
to minimize these hardships. Irrevocable beneficiary
designations are meant to provide the insured and
beneficiary alike with the certainty that the insurance
proceeds will be received in a timely manner free of
creditor claims. As per s. 196(1) of the Insurance Act,
“Where a beneficiary is designated, the insurance
money, from the time of the happening of the event
upon which the insurance money becomes payable,
is not part of the estate of the insured and is not subject
 to the claims of the creditors of the insured.” The
Insurance Act provides even greater protection of the
372


policy and proceeds where an irrevocable beneficiary
is designated. In that case, from the moment such
a designation is made, the policy and its proceeds
are not subject to the claims of any of the insured’s
creditors and are immune from any attempted redes-
ignations. The inability of creditors and the insured
to access or control the policy proceeds provides




certainty to the insured and beneficiary that the latter
will be provided the support that they were intended
to have.

[142] At the expense of the above considerations,
the majority seems to stress the Insurance Act’s interest
 in certainty for insurers, but not the insured or
their chosen beneficiaries. The Insurance Act pur-
portedly outlines who should receive the proceeds,
but not who should retain them. Michelle makes
the same argument. While it is true that the insurance
 scheme benefits when insurers can identify
with certainty the person who is entitled to receive
a policy’s proceeds, the provisions of the Insurance
Act go beyond this. If the interests protected by the
beneficiary provisions were principally those of the
insurers, there would be no need for the proceeds
to be free from creditor claims, or to bypass the insured
’s estate. A statute could achieve certainty for
the insurer by merely directing that the proceeds be
paid to the insured’s estate, to be distributed according
 to the insured’s testamentary dispositions. The
function of these provisions is not merely to ensure
that a beneficiary receive the proceeds, and they
should not be treated as such.

[143] In fact, if Risa only has a right to receive
but not retain the proceeds, it would seem to follow
that all insurance proceeds would be subject to the
claims of creditors, contrary to the express wording
of the provisions. As such, if one were to accept —
which we do not — that there is a principled basis to
distinguish between creditors like Michelle and other
creditors of an insured’s estate, insurance proceeds
would still end up being the subject of disputes and
litigation. Various creditors would argue that they,
too, have preferred status that should exempt them
from the operation of the Insurance Act. Regardless
[2018] 3 R.C.S.


of whether these creditors would ultimately be successful
 in their claims for unjust enrichment, the
result reached by the majority invites them to nonetheless
 attempt to collect on the insured’s policy
proceeds and tie up the proceeds in potentially pro-
tracted and expensive litigation, contrary to the intention
 of the Insurance Act. Even worse, this could




leave designated beneficiaries vulnerable not just to
creditors, but also to those who have sustained the
policy for any period. Beneficiaries and insureds will
thus be denied the certainty that the Insurance Act
would otherwise provide.

III. Conclusion

[144] Death is sometimes accompanied by much
uncertainty and strife. To the extent that it is possible,
the Insurance Act moderates such uncertainty by
creating a comprehensive regime for all those involved
 in a life insurance contract. Notwithstanding
our view that there is no corresponding deprivation
of Michelle, there is also a juristic reason for the
transfer to Risa; we would not attenuate the sensible
regime put forward by the legislature. As Michelle’s
claim of unjust enrichment is not made out, we would
dismiss the appeal.

   Appeal allowed, Gascon and Rowe JJ. dissent‑
ing.

   Solicitors for the appellant: Hull & Hull, Toronto.

   Solicitors for the respondent: Torys, Toronto.
