675
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


Southcott Estates Inc.
on cross-appeal

v.

Toronto Catholic District School
Board Respondent/Appellant on cross-appeal

Indexed as: Southcott Estates Inc. v. Toronto
Catholic District School Board
2012 SCC 51
File No.: 33778.
2012: March 20; 2012: October 17.
Present: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Deschamps,
Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell and Karakatsanis JJ.

on appeal from the court of appeal for
ontario
    Contracts — Commercial contracts — Remedies —
Specific performance — Duty to mitigate — Single-
purpose company entering into agreement for purchase
of land — Vendor breaching contractual obligations —
Company seeking specific performance — Whether
single-purpose company must mitigate its losses —
Whether plaintiff seeking specific performance has
obligation to mitigate its losses — Whether trial judge
erred in concluding there were no comparable properties
 available for mitigation.
   The appellant S is a single-purpose company incor-
porated solely for the purpose of a specific land purchase
, with no assets other than money advanced to it
by its parent company for the deposit relating to such
purchase. It entered into an agreement of purchase and
sale for a specific property with the respondent. When
the respondent failed to satisfy a condition and refused
to extend the closing date, S sought specific performance
 of the contract. It argued that it was not required
to mitigate its losses. The trial judge refused to award
specific performance but awarded damages to S in the
amount of $1,935,500. The Court of Appeal concluded
that the respondent had breached its contractual obligations
 but that S had failed to take available steps to
mitigate its losses. It reduced the damage award to a
nominal sum.
676


   Held (McLachlin C.J. dissenting): The appeal and
cross-appeal should be dismissed.
    Per LeBel, Deschamps, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell
and Karakatsanis JJ.: Mitigation is a doctrine based on
fairness and common sense, which seeks to do justice
between the parties in the particular circumstances of
the case. As a general rule, a plaintiff will not be able
to recover those losses which he could have avoided by
taking reasonable steps.
    The main issue is whether S, a single-purpose corporation
, was excused from mitigating its losses when
the vendor breached the agreement of purchase and
sale, and particularly when it had promptly brought an
action for specific performance. As a separate legal entity
, S was required to mitigate by making diligent efforts
 to find a substitute property. Those who choose
the benefits of incorporation must bear the corresponding
 burdens. One such responsibility is to take steps to
mitigate losses. A plaintiff cannot recover losses that
could reasonably have been avoided. S sought specific
performance and was therefore ready to complete the
purchase. Its alternative claim for consequential damages
 was predicated upon its access to capital to complete
 the agreement of purchase and sale. As such, both
claims were premised upon resources that were not tied
up as a result of the breach alleged. S can hardly argue
that the same money would not have been available for
mitigation. In the absence of actual evidence of impecu-
niosity, finding that losses cannot be reasonably avoided
, simply because the corporation is a single-purpose
corporation within a larger group of companies, would
give these corporations an unfair advantage. If single-
purpose corporations were not required to mitigate
their losses, this could expose defendants contracting
with such corporations to higher damage awards.
    This Court has recognized that there may be situations
 in which a plaintiff’s inaction is justifiable notwithstanding
 its failure to obtain an order for specific
performance. If the plaintiff has a “fair, real, and substantial
 justification” or a “substantial and legitimate
interest” in specific performance, its refusal to purchase
 other property may be reasonable, depending
upon the circumstances of the case. A plaintiff deprived
of an investment property does not have a “fair, real,
and substantial justification” or a “substantial and legitimate
 interest” in specific performance unless he can
show that money is not a complete remedy because the
677
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


land has “a peculiar and special value” to him. S has not
demonstrated such a claim and therefore cannot justify
its inaction. S was engaged in a commercial transaction
 for the purpose of making a profit. The property’s
particular qualities were only of value due to their ability
 to further profitability, for which damages were an
adequate remedy.
   Where it is alleged that the plaintiff has failed to
mitigate, the defendant bears the burden of proving that
the plaintiff has failed to make reasonable efforts to
mitigate and that mitigation was possible. Whether or
not there were comparable properties and whether they
are profitable is a finding of fact. The trial judge made
a palpable and overriding error in finding there were
no comparable mitigation opportunities. He failed to
consider the reasonable and available inferences arising
from expert evidence regarding other land suitable for
development sold in the area, the investment properties
purchased by the parent company of S and the absence
of evidence to the contrary. The respondent discharged
the burden of showing that there were other comparable
development properties available in the relevant time
period to mitigate the losses.
    Per McLachlin C.J. (dissenting): The Board, having
breached the contract, bears the onus of proving that S
unreasonably failed to mitigate its loss. This entails establishing
, on a balance of probabilities: (1) that an opportunity
 to mitigate the loss was available to S; and (2)
that S unreasonably failed to pursue that opportunity.
The trial judge’s finding that the Board failed to establish
 that S had an opportunity to mitigate is sufficient to
dispose of the appeal. This finding was grounded in the
evidence and did not constitute palpable and overriding
error. The Board failed to prove that another property
comparable to the one that S sought to purchase was
available. Neither the evidence of the Board’s expert
witness nor that of purchases by other subsidiaries of
S’s parent company established that a comparable property
 was available for S.
    Moreover, S could not be unreasonable in failing
to mitigate its loss because it reasonably maintained
its action for specific performance. The act of filing a
claim for specific performance is inconsistent with the
act of acquiring a substitute property. A plaintiff, acting
 reasonably, cannot pursue specific performance and
mitigate its potential loss of damages at the same time.
678


There is no basis on which to conclude that S acted
unreasonably in maintaining its suit for specific performance
 instead of mitigating its loss. S had a “fair,
real, and substantial justification” for claiming specific
performance. The property was uniquely suited to S’s
needs for single-family residential development within
the City of Toronto. The evidence supported the view
that there were no comparable substitute properties.
   Furthermore, it is difficult to conclude that S unreasonably
 failed to mitigate given that S lacked the financial
 capacity to go into the market and purchase a
substitute property.
Cases Cited
By Karakatsanis J.
   Referred to: Asamera Oil Corp. v. Seal Oil & General
 Corp., [1979] 1 S.C.R. 633; British Westinghouse
Electric and Manufacturing Co. v. Underground Electric
Railways Company of London, Ltd., [1912] A.C. 673;
British Columbia v. Canadian Forest Products Ltd.,
2004 SCC 38, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 74; Red Deer College
v. Michaels, [1976] 2 S.C.R. 324; Evans v. Teamsters
Local Union No. 31, 2008 SCC 20, [2008] 1 S.C.R.
661; Redpath Industries Ltd. v. Cisco (The), [1994] 2
F.C. 279; Kosmopoulos v. Constitution Insurance Co.,
[1987] 1 S.C.R. 2; Semelhago v. Paramadevan, [1996]
2 S.C.R. 415; Adderley v. Dixon (1824), 1 Sim. & St.
607, 57 E.R. 239; Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33,
[2002] 2 S.C.R. 235.
By McLachlin C.J. (dissenting)
    Asamera Oil Corp. v. Seal Oil & General Corp.,
[1979] 1 S.C.R. 633; British Westinghouse Electric and
Manufacturing Co. v. Underground Electric Railways
Company of London, Ltd., [1912] A.C. 673; Dunkirk
Colliery Co. v. Lever (1878), 9 Ch. D. 20; Janiak v.
Ippolito, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 146; Darbishire v. Warran,
[1963] 1 W.L.R. 1067; Red Deer College v. Michaels,
[1976] 2 S.C.R. 324; Roper v. Johnson (1873), L.R.
8 C.P. 167; Lagden v. O’Connor, [2003] UKHL 64,
[2004] 1 All E.R. 277; General Securities Ltd. v.
Don Ingram Ltd., [1940] S.C.R. 670; Andros Springs
v. World Beauty, [1970] P. 144; Housen v. Nikolaisen,
2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235; Apeco of Canada,
Ltd. v. Windmill Place, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 385; Semelhago
v. Paramadevan, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 415.
Statutes and Regulations Cited
Education Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. E.2.
679
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


Authors Cited
Bates, Paul. “Mitigation of Damages: A Matter of Commercial
    Common Sense” (1992), 13 Advocates’ Q.
   273.
McGregor, Harvey. McGregor on Damages, 18th ed.
   London: Sweet & Maxwell/Thomson Reuters, 2009.
Siebrasse, Norman. “Damages in Lieu of Specific Performance
   : Semelhago v. Paramadevan” (1997), 76
   Can. Bar Rev. 551.
Yorio, Edward. “A Defense of Equitable Defenses”
   (1990), 51 Ohio St. L.J. 1201.

   APPEAL and CROSS-APPEAL from a judgment
 of the Ontario Court of Appeal (Sharpe,
Blair and MacFarland JJ.A.), 2010 ONCA 310, 104
O.R. (3d) 784, 261 O.A.C. 108, 319 D.L.R. (4th)
349, 93 R.P.R. (4th) 159, 71 B.L.R. (4th) 196, [2010]
O.J. No. 1772 (QL), 2010 CarswellOnt 2602, setting
aside a decision of Spiegel J. (2009), 78 R.P.R. (4th)
285, [2009] O.J. No. 428 (QL), 2009 CanLII 3567,
2009 CarswellOnt 494. Appeal and cross-appeal
dismissed, McLachlin C.J. dissenting.

  J. Thomas Curry, Milton A. Davis and Paul-
Erik Veel, for the appellant/respondent on cross-
appeal.

   Andrew M. Robinson, Elizabeth K. Ackman and
Andrea Farkouh, for the respondent/appellant on
cross-appeal.

   The judgment of LeBel, Deschamps, Abella,
Rothstein, Cromwell and Karakatsanis JJ. was delivered
 by

     K arakatsanis J. —
I.

[1] Real estate developers frequently create single-
purpose corporations for the sole purpose of purchasing
 and developing properties for profit. The
corporation has limited liability and no assets other
 than those that arise from the particular real estate
 investment. The issue raised in this appeal is
whether such a single-purpose corporation is excused
 from mitigating its losses when the vendor
breaches the agreement of purchase and sale, and
680


particularly when it has promptly brought an action
 for specific performance. The further issue
is whether the trial judge erred in his finding that
there were no other “comparable” properties available
 to mitigate the loss.

[2] The appellant, Southcott Estates Inc., was
part of the Ballantry Group of associated companies
 that acquired and developed land in the
Greater Toronto Area (“GTA”). Southcott was a
single-purpose corporation, without assets, created
for the sole purpose of developing the property that
is the subject of this action. When the vendor, the
Toronto Catholic District School Board, failed to
satisfy a condition and refused to extend the closing
 date, Southcott sought specific performance of
the contract. It argues that it was not required to
mitigate its losses.

[3] The trial judge ((2009), 78 R.P.R. (4th) 285)
found that the Board had breached the agreement
of purchase and sale and had failed to prove that
Southcott could have mitigated its damages. He
awarded damages for loss of chance of profit. He
refused to order specific performance, finding that
the property was not “unique” and damages were
an adequate remedy.

[4] The Ontario Court of Appeal (2010 ONCA
310, 104 O.R. (3d) 784) concluded that while the
trial judge correctly found that the Board had
breached its contractual obligations, he had erred
in his approach to mitigation. The court concluded
 that Southcott had unreasonably failed to take
available steps to mitigate its loss and reduced the
damage award granted at trial to a nominal sum.

[5] Southcott did not appeal the trial judge’s refusal
 to award specific performance. However, it
681
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


maintains its losses were not avoidable. The questions
 raised in this appeal are:

1.
     losses?

2. To what extent must a plaintiff mitigate where
   the plaintiff has made a claim for specific performance
   ?

3. Did the trial judge err in concluding that there
   was no evidence of comparable profitable
   properties available for mitigation?

[6] For the reasons that follow, I conclude that
Southcott cannot recover losses that it could reasonably
 have avoided. I agree with the Court of
Appeal that the trial judge erred in concluding that
there was no evidence of other development properties
 that Southcott could have purchased in mitigation
. I would dismiss the appeal.

II. Facts

[7] Southcott is a wholly owned subsidiary
 of Ballantry Homes Inc. and part of a larger
group of companies called Ballantry Group of
Companies (“Ballantry” or “Ballantry Group”).
The Board is a School Board created pursuant to the
Education Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. E.2, whose affairs
were run by a publicly elected Board of Trustees.

[8] Having determined that certain land within a
school property was surplus to its needs, the Board
put it up for sale. Intending to use the land for residential
 development, Southcott agreed to purchase
the 4.78 acres of land for $3.44 million. It paid a
10 percent deposit and the parties agreed to a closing
 date of August 31, 2004. It was a condition of
the agreement that the Board obtain a severance
from the Committee of Adjustments on or before
the closing date. On August 30, 2004, the parties
682


agreed to extend the closing date to January 31,
2005.

[9] The Board applied for a severance in
November; it was advised that a development plan
was necessary but chose to proceed without one.
On December 16, 2004, at the municipality’s request
, the Committee of Adjustments deferred the
severance application hearing as premature because
 it was not accompanied by a development
plan. At that time, it became clear to Southcott and
the Board that the transaction could not be completed
 by the closing date of January 31, 2005. The
Board refused Southcott’s request to extend the
closing date, declared the transaction to be at an
end, and returned Southcott’s deposit.

[10] Southcott took the position that the Board
had breached its obligation to use its best efforts
to obtain the severance and commenced an action
for specific performance or, in the alternative, for
damages.

[11] Southcott admitted that it never had any intention
 to mitigate its loss and, indeed, never tried
to mitigate (para. 137 of the trial judge’s decision).
Southcott was a single-purpose company incorpo-
rated solely for the purposes of this development
project and had no assets other than the money
advanced by Ballantry for the deposit. It never in-
tended to purchase other land. In fact, Southcott’s
principal testified at trial that there was no question
 of it purchasing other land, given that it was
involved in this litigation (para. 18 of the Court of
Appeal’s decision).

[12] The Board led expert evidence that 81 parcels
 of vacant development land in the GTA were
sold between the date of breach and the date of
trial. The land was suitable for residential development
 and within the parameters, of size and
683
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


price, of other lands purchased by the Ballantry
Group.

[13] Corporations within the Ballantry Group
purchased seven parcels of land for development
purposes during this same period. The principal of
Ballantry testified that it was always in the market
for new land, had the financial means to make the
purchases, and it would have made these purchases
even if Southcott had completed the land purchase
from the Board (para. 138 of the trial judge’s decision
).

III. Decisions Below

[14] At trial, Spiegel J. concluded that the Board
had failed to take all reasonable steps to fulfill the
severance condition. It breached its best efforts
obligation by failing to contact relevant city staff;
delaying in processing the severance application;
failing to include the proposed plan of use with
the severance application; submitting an improper
survey; failing to seek appropriate advice; ignoring
the advice of the Committee of Adjustments; pro-
ceeding with the application for severance even after
 being advised that it was incomplete and failing
to keep Southcott informed (paras. 71-87).
[15] The trial judge found that had the Board used
its best efforts, the severance would likely have
been granted, and the transaction would have been
completed by the closing date. The trial judge was
satisfied that the Board’s breach caused Southcott’s
loss (paras. 93-116).
[16] Turning to remedy, Spiegel J. found that
specific performance was not an appropriate remedy
 as the land did not have the quality of uniqueness
 (paras. 128-33).
684


[17] However, he concluded that Southcott was
entitled to damages. He rejected the Board’s argument
 that Southcott had in fact mitigated damages
because the Ballantry Group made several purchases
 subsequent to the breach of the agreement:

I find that these subsequent purchases were collateral,
independent transactions that did not arise out of the
consequences of the breach. In all the circumstances
, I do not consider these transactions as mitigatory.
[para. 143]

[18] The trial judge found that the Board had
not discharged the onus of proving that Southcott
failed to take advantage of a reasonable opportunity
 to mitigate its loss. He held that there was
no evidence that any of the available properties
were actually offered for sale or could have been
profitably developed and he was not satisfied that
the properties were comparable (paras. 144-46).
He therefore awarded Southcott damages in the
amount of $1,935,500 which represented the loss of
a 60 percent chance to make profits in the amount
of $3,225,827.

[19] On appeal, the Board did not dispute the
findings that it had breached its obligation to use
its best efforts to obtain the severance required to
complete the sale. It challenged the findings of cau-
sation and mitigation.

[20] Sharpe J.A., writing for the Court of Appeal,
rejected the first ground of the Board’s appeal, that
the trial judge erred in finding that the Board’s
breach was the cause of the failure to obtain the
severance by the closing date (paras. 11-14).

[21] Regarding the issue of whether the losses
could have been avoided, however, the Court of
Appeal concluded that the trial judge had erred in
law in finding that the Board had not shown that
685
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


Southcott could have mitigated its losses. First,
Southcott’s admission that it had no intention of
taking any steps to mitigate was sufficient to satisfy
 the onus resting upon the Board and to shift
the evidentiary onus to Southcott to demonstrate
that, even if it had attempted to mitigate, it could
not have done so. Second, the trial judge erred in
dealing with the Board’s evidence regarding the
land that was available: “By requiring the Board
to prove . . . the profitability of individual parcels,
the trial judge raised any bar the Board had to satisfy
 to an unrealistic level” (para. 25). Finally, the
trial judge failed to consider that Ballantry’s purchases
 of other lands clearly demonstrated that the
directing mind of Southcott knew that investment
quality lands, suitable for profitable development,
were available on the market. The Court of Appeal
stated that Southcott was a distinct legal entity that
could not avoid mitigating its loss by arguing that
it was a part of Ballantry: the obligation to mitigate
rested with Southcott (paras. 24-27).

[22] The Court of Appeal concluded that while
Southcott had made out its case for breach of contract
, it failed to make out a case for either specific
performance or damages. The appropriate award
was for nominal damages in the amount of $1.

IV. Mitigation — General Principles

[23] This Court in Asamera Oil Corp. v. Seal
Oil & General Corp., [1979] 1 S.C.R. 633, cited (at
pp. 660-61) with approval the statement of Viscount
Haldane L.C. in British Westinghouse Electric
and Manufacturing Co. v. Underground Electric
686


Railways Company of London, Ltd., [1912] A.C.
673, at p. 689:

    The fundamental basis is thus compensation for pe-
cuniary loss naturally flowing from the breach; but this
first principle is qualified by a second, which imposes
on a plaintiff the duty of taking all reasonable steps to
mitigate the loss consequent on the breach, and debars
him from claiming any part of the damage which is due
to his neglect to take such steps.

[24] In British Columbia v. Canadian Forest
Products Ltd., 2004 SCC 38, [2004] 2 S.C.R.
74, at para. 176, this Court explained that “[l]os-
ses that could reasonably have been avoided are,
in effect, caused by the plaintiff’s inaction, rather
than the defendant’s wrong.” As a general rule, a
plaintiff will not be able to recover for those losses
 which he could have avoided by taking reasonable
 steps. Where it is alleged that the plaintiff has
failed to mitigate, the burden of proof is on the defendant
, who needs to prove both that the plaintiff
has failed to make reasonable efforts to mitigate
and that mitigation was possible (Red Deer College
v. Michaels, [1976] 2 S.C.R. 324; Asamera; Evans
v. Teamsters Local Union No. 31, 2008 SCC 20,
[2008] 1 S.C.R. 661, at para. 30).

[25] On the other hand, a plaintiff who does take
reasonable steps to mitigate loss may recover, as
damages, the costs and expenses incurred in taking
those reasonable steps, provided that the costs and
expenses are reasonable and were truly incurred in
mitigation of damages (see P. Bates, “Mitigation
of Damages: A Matter of Commercial Common
Sense” (1992), 13 Advocates’ Q. 273). The valua-
tion of damages is therefore a balancing process:
as the Federal Court of Appeal stated in Redpath
Industries Ltd. v. Cisco (The), [1994] 2 F.C. 279, at
p. 302: “The Court must make sure that the victim
is compensated for his loss; but it must at the same
time make sure that the wrongdoer is not abused.”
Mitigation is a doctrine based on fairness and
common sense, which seeks to do justice between
687
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


the parties in the particular circumstances of the
case.

A. Should a Single-Purpose Company Mitigate
   its Losses?

[26] Southcott argues that the Court of Appeal
failed to recognize the unique circumstance of a
single-purpose corporation in mitigating contractual
 loss; as a single-purpose company, it was impecunious
 and unable to mitigate without signifi-
cant capital investment of the parent company or
without the corporate mandate to do so. Further,
it submits that it would be reasonably foreseeable
to those contracting with a single-purpose corporation
 that such an entity would have finite resources
and a confined corporate mandate. In this case,
Southcott acted reasonably, within its ordinary
course of business and promptly brought this law-
suit.

[27] Southcott sought specific performance and
was therefore ready to complete the purchase. In
any event, its alternative claim for consequential
damages was predicated upon its access to capital
to complete the agreement of purchase and sale. As
such, both claims were premised upon resources,
resources that were not tied up as a result of the
breach alleged. Indeed, the alleged breach in this
case did not affect Southcott’s ability to obtain capital
. Southcott can hardly argue that the same money
 would not have been available for mitigation.

[28] Further, the question is factual and it was not
suggested at trial that Southcott had no access to
capital or that borrowing money would have been
unreasonably risky or costly. Southcott did not argue
 that it was impecunious at trial.

[29] In the absence of actual evidence of impe-
cuniosity, finding that losses cannot be reasonably
688


avoided, simply because it is a single-purpose corporation
 within a larger group of companies, would
give an unfair advantage to those conducting business
 through single-purpose corporations. In addition
, not requiring single-purpose corporations to
mitigate would expose defendants contracting with
such corporations to higher damage awards than
those reasonably claimed by other plaintiffs, based
solely upon their limited assets.

[30] The trial judge found that the purchases of
development land by other corporations within the
Ballantry Group did not in fact mitigate Southcott’s
loss; that finding is not challenged here. As noted
 above, he found that the other properties purchased
 by other members of the Ballantry group
were “collateral” in the sense that the purchases
would have occurred whether or not the defendant
 had breached its contract with Southcott (para.
143). However, because Southcott is a separate legal
 entity, purchases by other Ballantry corporations
 of other comparable property did not make
those properties “unavailable” for mitigation. As
a separate legal entity, Southcott was required to
mitigate by making diligent efforts to find a substitute
 property. Those who choose the benefits of incorporation
 must bear the corresponding burdens:
Kosmopoulos v. Constitution Insurance Co., [1987]
1 S.C.R. 2, at pp. 10-12. Southcott is entitled to the
benefits of limited liability, but it is also saddled
with the responsibilities that all legal entities have.
The requirement to take steps to mitigate losses is
one such responsibility. A plaintiff cannot recover
 losses that could reasonably have been avoided.
The overriding issue here is whether Southcott’s inaction
 was reasonable, and if not, whether it could
have reasonably mitigated if it had tried to do so.
689
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


B. Southcott Was Required to Mitigate Losses
   Despite its Claim for Specific Performance

[31] Specific performance is an equitable remedy
that is difficult to reconcile with the principle of
mitigation. Obviously, if Southcott had purchased a
property in mitigation, it may not have been able to
complete its agreement of purchase and sale of the
Board’s surplus land if ultimately successful in its
claim for specific performance. When can a plaintiff
 seeking specific performance justify inaction
and recover losses which may otherwise have been
classified as avoidable?

[32] The trial judge found that Southcott did not
have a viable claim for specific performance. He
found that while the business opportunity may
have been unique, the property itself was not. The
trial judge found that what was at issue here was a
straightforward business plan, the failure of which
could be measured in damages (para. 132). The
Court of Appeal agreed. The trial judge’s decision
not to order specific performance is not challenged
in this appeal.

[33] However, Southcott submits that even though
it was unsuccessful in its claim for specific performance
, it proceeded expeditiously and the claim
had real substance because the property was a
unique opportunity, given its location and the rarity
of such properties in the GTA. As a result, it says
that it was not reasonable to attempt to mitigate;
the remedy of specific performance would become
illusory.

[34] Southcott suggests that there are two separate
 questions that a court must ask in cases
where a plaintiff seeks specific performance: (1)
should specific performance be awarded? And if
the answer is no, (2) is this plaintiff justified in
its mitigatory inaction? Southcott says that the
trial judge conflated these two questions and did
690


not consider whether it was justified in failing to
mitigate.

[35] This Court dealt with this issue in Asamera,
at pp. 668-69:

Before a plaintiff can rely on a claim to specific performance
 so as to insulate himself from the consequences
of failing to procure alternate property in mitigation of
his losses, some fair, real, and substantial justification
for his claim to performance must be found. . . .

                         .

   . . . Where . . . circumstances reveal a substantial
and legitimate interest in seeking [specific] performance
 as opposed to damages, then a plaintiff will be
able to justify his inaction and on failing in his plea for
specific performance might then [be able to] recover
losses which in other circumstances might be classified
as avoidable and thus unrecoverable . . . .

[36] This Court thus recognized that there may
be situations in which a plaintiff’s inaction is justifiable
 notwithstanding its failure to obtain an order
for specific performance where circumstances reveal
 “some fair, real, and substantial justification”
for his claim or “a substantial and legitimate interest
” in seeking specific performance (Asamera,
at pp. 668-69 (emphasis added)). This does not
mean that a plaintiff with such a claim should not
attempt to mitigate; rather it recognizes that such
a claim for specific performance informs what is
reasonable behaviour for the plaintiff in mitigation.
See N. Siebrasse, “Damages in Lieu of Specific
Performance: Semelhago v. Paramadevan” (1997),
76 Can. Bar Rev. 551.

[37] Asamera set out the general principles gov-
erning mitigation: was the plaintiff’s inaction
reasonable in the circumstances, and could the
plaintiff have mitigated if it chose to do so. Those
principles apply to a plaintiff seeking specific performance
. If the plaintiff has a “substantial justification
” or a “substantial and legitimate interest” in
specific performance, its refusal to purchase other
691
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


property may be reasonable, depending upon the
circumstances of the case.

[38] The statements in Asamera dealing with
specific performance and the determination of
what is reasonable conduct must be read in light of
Semelhago v. Paramadevan, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 415.
In that case, the Court acknowledged that “[w]hile
at one time the common law regarded every piece
of real estate to be unique, with the progress of
modern real estate development this is no longer the
case” (para. 20). The Court thus found that it “cannot
 be assumed that damages for breach of contract
for the purchase and sale of real estate will be an
inadequate remedy in all cases” (para. 21). Specific
performance will be available only where money
cannot compensate fully for the loss, because of
some “peculiar and special value” of the land to the
plaintiff (para. 21, citing Adderley v. Dixon (1824),
1 Sim. & St. 607, 57 E.R. 239, at p. 240).

[39] The overriding issue is therefore whether
Southcott’s inaction was reasonable. Southcott
argued at trial that the fact that the property was
uniquely well situated gives it the unique character
required to constitute a fair justification for specific
 performance (para. 119 of the trial judge’s decision
).

[40] I agree with the courts below that this is not
a case where the plaintiff could reasonably refuse
to mitigate. The trial judge made clear findings
that the land was nothing more unique to Southcott
than a singularly good investment and that this was
not a case in which damages were too speculative
 or uncertain to be a satisfactory remedy. The
unique qualities related solely to the profitability of
the development for which damages were an adequate
 remedy (paras. 126 and 128). The calculation
of profits was not conjectural or speculative as the
proposed development was not complex, and the
only disagreement between the parties regarding
692


the quantum of damages related to the timing
and rate of sale of completed units (paras. 130 and
132).

[41] A plaintiff deprived of an investment property
 does not have a “fair, real, and substantial justification
” or a “substantial and legitimate” interest
in specific performance (Asamera, at pp. 668-69)
unless he can show that money is not a complete
remedy because the land has “a peculiar and special
 value” to him (Semelhago, at para. 21, citing
Adderley, at p. 240). Southcott could not make such
a claim. It was engaged in a commercial transaction
 for the purpose of making a profit. The property
’s particular qualities were only of value due to
their ability to further profitability. Southcott cannot
 therefore justify its inaction.

C. The Trial Judge Erred in Finding no Evidence
   of Comparable Profitable Properties Available
    for Mitigation

[42] In this case, Southcott admitted that it made
no efforts to mitigate — on the basis that it was not
obliged to do so. Southcott submits that the Court
of Appeal erred in shifting the onus to the plaintiff
 based on the admission by Southcott’s principal
 that he had no intention to mitigate through
Southcott. Southcott says that the Board did not
provide the trial judge with evidence that there was
a comparable profitable investment property available
 for sale. The trial judge found that there were
no comparable or profitable properties. Southcott
submits that the Court of Appeal erred in disre-
garding the trial judge’s finding of fact and in sub-
stituting its own.

[43] The entirety of the trial judge’s analysis on
this issue was as follows:
693
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


There was no evidence that the properties referred to
[by the Board’s expert] were actually available to the
public for sale but only that they had been sold. Also
there was no evidence that had these properties been
purchased that they could have been profitably developed
. In any event, I am not satisfied that the evidence
established that these were comparable properties or
that had they been purchased, that the plaintiff’s loss
would have been avoided or reduced. [para. 144]

[44] Regarding the failure to mitigate, the Court
of Appeal found that the trial judge had erred in
law:
    First, Southcott’s admission that it had no intention
of taking any steps to mitigate its loss was sufficient
to satisfy the onus resting upon the Board to prove
failure to mitigate and to shift the evidentiary onus to
Southcott of demonstrating that, even if it had attempted
 to mitigate, it could not have done so. Southcott led
no evidence to that effect. In my view, the trial judge
erred by holding that the Board had failed to meet the
onus imposed upon it to prove that Southcott had failed
to mitigate its damages.
    . . . By requiring the Board to prove the precise manner
 in which 81 parcels of investment land had been sold
or to prove the profitability of individual parcels, the
trial judge raised any bar the Board had to satisfy to an
unrealistic level, particularly in the face of Southcott’s
admission that it had no intention to mitigate and of the
evidence that Ballantry actually did find other suitable
development properties to purchase.
   Third, the trial judge erred in the manner in which he
dealt with the evidence of purchases made by Ballantry.
Those purchases clearly demonstrate that the directing
mind of Southcott knew that investment-quality lands,
suitable for profitable development, were available on
the market. [paras. 24-26]

[45] As noted above, where it is alleged that a
plaintiff has failed to mitigate damages, the onus
of proof on a balance of probabilities lies with the
694


defendant, who must establish not only that the
plaintiff failed to take reasonable efforts to find a
substitute, but also that a reasonable profitable substitute
 could be found.

[46] Thus, it would be an error to suggest that
the defendant did not have the burden of showing
 that mitigation was possible even where the
plaintiff made no attempt to do so. Further, while I
agree that the trial judge erred in dealing with the
Board’s evidence regarding the availability of the
81 properties, the error is best approached as an
evidentiary issue rather than as one engaging the
burden of proof.

[47] The finding about whether Southcott could
have mitigated involves applying a legal standard;
it is a question of mixed fact and law. Whether or
not there were comparable properties and whether
they were profitable is a finding of fact. Implicit
in the Court of Appeal’s decision is the conclusion
that the trial judge’s findings of fact were unreasonable
.

[48] For the reasons that follow, I agree with the
Court of Appeal that the trial judge erred in principle
 by failing to consider relevant evidence. In
particular, Ballantry’s subsequent purchases were
evidence that other development properties were
reasonably available. These errors skewed his factual
 analysis on the issue of mitigation. I conclude
that the trial judge made a palpable and overriding
 error in finding that there were no comparable
profitable mitigation opportunities: see Housen v.
Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, at
para. 10.

      (1) The Expert Evidence of Comparable
          Properties

[49] At trial, the Board presented evidence that 81
parcels of raw land suitable for development and 49
properties subdivided into lots suitable for building
695
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


were available for sale in the GTA and were in fact
sold in the period between January 31, 2005 and
the time of trial (para. 136 of the trial judge’s decision
). The parameters that the Board’s expert used
in selecting alternative available parcels were sales
of land between $1,000,000 and $27,000,000, that
had an estimated time to develop of one year or
less, and that could be developed for low to medi-
um density residential. These parameters were cho-
sen to match the parameters of the actual purchases
made by the Ballantry Group.

[50] Nevertheless, the trial judge concluded that
the Board had not discharged the onus of proving
that Southcott failed to take advantage of a reasonable
 opportunity to mitigate. He found that: there
was no evidence that the 81 properties were actually
 available to the public for sale; there was no
evidence that, had these properties been purchased,
they could have been profitably developed, and the
plaintiff’s loss could have been avoided or reduced;
and in any event, these properties were not comparable
 properties.

[51] The trial judge failed to consider the available
 and reasonable inferences of the Board’s evidence
 that there were 81 parcels of raw land suitable
 for development and 49 properties subdivided
into lots suitable for building sold during the time
period in issue here. In cross-examination, the
Board’s expert witness admitted being unaware of
the marketing strategies used to sell the 81 properties
 sold during the period in which the Board
suggested that Southcott could mitigate (A.R., at
p. 232-33). However, notwithstanding that answer,
it is an obvious inference that if 81 properties suitable
 for development were offered for sale, and
were in fact sold, then investment properties were
available to developers for sale, particularly in the
absence of evidence to the contrary.
696


[52] Further, the trial judge failed to consider
whether the fact that all of the properties the Board’s
expert testified to were capable of being brought to
development in a year could support an inference
that their development was profitable. Reasonable
inferences of profitability could be drawn based
upon the size and price of property or the fact that
land was purchased for development purposes by
experienced developers. The trial judge did not
turn his mind to this evidence.

[53] Finally, the trial judge also failed to consider
that an adverse inference against Southcott could
be drawn from the fact that it led no evidence about
the profitability of the alternative development opportunities
.

      (2) The Purchases by Ballantry

[54] I agree with the Court of Appeal that the
trial judge also erred in failing to consider whether
the purchases by the Ballantry corporations provided
 evidence of other profitable properties available
 in mitigation. As noted above, the trial judge
found (at para. 143) that the other properties purchased
 by other members of the Ballantry Group
were “collateral” in the sense that the transactions
would have occurred whether or not the defendant
had breached its contract with Southcott and did
not represent actual mitigation due to Southcott’s
distinct legal personality. This is not challenged.

[55] The trial judge did not go on to consider,
however, whether these transactions established
that those same properties were evidence of “available
” comparable mitigation opportunities in the
market. Because Southcott is a separate legal entity,
purchases by other Ballantry corporations of other
comparable property did not make those properties
 “unavailable” for mitigation. In effect, the
trial judge ignored the separate legal personalities
697
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


of Southcott and the other corporations in the
Ballantry Group by failing to consider those purchases
 as evidence of the existence of mitigation
opportunities.

[56] The Ballantry Group companies purchased
seven other development properties subsequent to
the breach of the agreement, ranging in size from
2.3 acres to 110.8 acres and in price from $3.3 million
 to $27.1 million. In particular, two specific
purchases were clearly comparable. Southcott had
agreed to purchase 4.78 acres of land for $3.44 million
 in August 2004. Ballantry corporations purchased
 2.7 acres for $3.3 million in August 2005
and 2.3 acres for $6 million in December 2006.

[57] The defence raised by Southcott, which
was accepted by the trial judge, was that the purchases
 by Ballantry Group of development lands in
the GTA were purchases which would have been
made in any event, regardless of whether Southcott
purchased the Board’s property. However, it is no
answer to say that other companies in the same corporate
 group would have purchased the other available
 lands in any event. It was clear from the testimony
 of the president of Southcott and co-owner
of Ballantry that the Ballantry Group was always
purchasing promising development land and that
the different companies were simply used as different
 vehicles to invest.

[58] It was a choice on the part of the princi-
pals of the Ballantry Group as to which corporate
entity would be used for each purchase and they
elected not to use Southcott. In addition, the trial
judge found that “[t]he plaintiff[’s] proposed development
 here was not complex, but rather a rela-
tively straightforward plan for the development of
48 semi-detached residential units” (para. 132). In
698


these circumstances, a straightforward development
 could have been carried out on a different
property by Southcott, had it wanted to mitigate its
loss. This corresponds to the modern reality recognized
 in Semelhago that “[r]esidential, business
and industrial properties are all mass produced
much in the same way as other consumer products
” (para. 20).

[59] As the Court of Appeal concluded (at paras
. 25-26), the Ballantry Group’s purchases of
other properties was evidence that other suitable
development lands were available and the decision
not to purchase them in Southcott’s name was based
on other considerations. I agree with the Court of
Appeal that the trial judge erred in failing to consider
 these purchases as evidence of other available
and comparable development properties.

V. Conclusion

[60] In conclusion, the trial judge erred in failing
 to consider relevant evidence and made a palpable
 and overriding error of fact in concluding
that Southcott could not have reasonably avoided
its loss.

[61] He failed to take into account in his analysis
 of the mitigation issue that Southcott had simply
 refused to take any mitigatory action. He failed
to consider the evidence of Ballantry’s purchases
as supporting the inference that alternative parcels
 were available and that their development was
sufficiently profitable to meet Ballantry’s requirements
. He conflated a lack of evidence regarding
the marketing of parcels with a lack of evidence
that any of the parcels had been available for sale.
He failed to consider whether the fact that all of
the properties the Board’s expert testified were
development properties capable of being brought
to development in a year could support an inference
 that their development was profitable.
Finally, he failed to consider the fact that Southcott
699
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


did not lead evidence to challenge the Board’s
evidence regarding alternative development
opportunities.

[62] In these circumstances, the Court of Appeal
was entitled to look at the record and conclude
that the trial judge’s findings regarding mitigation
were not available to him on the evidence. The evidence
 of the Ballantry purchases, in the context
of Southcott’s refusal to mitigate, established that
there were opportunities to mitigate by purchasing
 other development land in the GTA. Failure to
mitigate reduces damages. The Court of Appeal
concluded that, based upon the investment properties
 purchased by Ballantry, and in the absence of
evidence to the contrary, the Board discharged the
burden of showing that other investment properties
were available in the relevant time period to mitigate
 the losses and that the trial judge’s finding that
there were no comparable properties was not open
to him on the evidence. I agree.

[63] I would dismiss the appeal with costs. In
light of the result on the main appeal, I need not
consider the cross-appeal. The cross-appeal should
be dismissed without costs.

   The following are the reasons delivered by

[64] The Chief Justice (dissenting) — Damages
for breach of contract may be reduced if the plaintiff
 unreasonably fails to mitigate its loss. To show
that a plaintiff unreasonably failed to mitigate its
loss, the defendant who is in breach of the contract
must establish: (1) that an opportunity to mitigate
the loss existed; and (2) that the plaintiff acted unreasonably
 in failing to take that opportunity.
700


[65] The trial judge found as a fact that the defendant
 had not proved that Southcott had an opportunity
 to mitigate. This finding, in my view,
was grounded in the evidence. This is sufficient to
dispose of the appeal. However, if such opportunity
 were found to exist, I see no basis on which
to conclude that Southcott acted unreasonably in
maintaining its suit for specific performance instead
 of mitigating its loss. It follows, in my view,
that the judgment of the Court of Appeal should be
set aside, and the trial judge’s conclusion that the
plaintiff established breach of contract and damages
 should be restored.

I.

[66] The Toronto Catholic District School Board
contracted with Southcott Estates Inc. for the sale
of 4.78 acres of surplus land for $3.44 million. The
closing date was August 31, 2004. Southcott was a
wholly owned subsidiary of Ballantry Homes Inc.,
which was in the business of buying property and
developing it for residential purposes. Southcott
was a single-purpose company created express-
ly and only for the purpose of buying this parcel
 of land and developing it with single-family
homes. Southcott had no assets except for the deposit
 it paid on the land.

[67] The land was part of a larger parcel on which
school buildings were located so the agreement
was conditional upon the Board obtaining a severance
 from the Committee of Adjustments on or
before the closing date. The agreement was signed
on June 14, 2004, but only became firm on August
23, 2004. The Board, realizing it might not be
able to get severance of the property by the closing
 date of August 31, 2004, asked Southcott to
extend the closing date to a fixed date after severance
. Southcott was willing to extend the August
31 closing date, but insisted on a firm final date of
January 31, 2005.
701
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


[68] The Board’s application for severance was
heard on December 16, 2004. It was deferred because
 the Board had failed to include a development
 plan in its application. This made it impossible
 for the Board to comply with the January 31,
2005 closing date. Southcott requested the Board
to extend the closing date. The Board refused this
request, declared the transaction to be at an end,
and returned Southcott’s deposit.

[69] Southcott took the position that the Board
had breached its obligation to use its best efforts to
obtain the severance and brought an action for specific
 performance or, in the alternative, damages.

[70] The trial judge held that the plaintiff was not
entitled to an order for specific performance because
 the property was not sufficiently unique to
satisfy the requirements of that remedy. However,
he awarded damages in the amount of $1,935,500,
representing the loss of a 60 percent chance to
make profits in the amount of $3,225,827. He rejected
 the Board’s argument that Southcott had
failed to act reasonably to mitigate its loss, holding
 that the Board had not established as a matter
of fact that mitigation opportunities were available.

[71] The Court of Appeal reversed the trial judge’s
decision and set aside the award for damages, essen-
tially holding that the evidence, properly viewed,
established an unreasonable failure to mitigate.

II. The Requirements of Mitigation

[72] The doctrine of mitigation holds that a plaintiff
 cannot recover damages for loss that could have
been reasonably avoided: Asamera Oil Corp. v. Sea
Oil & General Corp., [1979] 1 S.C.R. 633, at p. 660;
British Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing
Co. v. Underground Electric Railways Company
of London, Ltd., [1912] A.C. 673 (H.L.), at p. 689;
702


Dunkirk Colliery Co. v. Lever (1878), 9 Ch. D.
20 (C.A.), at p. 25. A plaintiff is not contractual-
ly obliged to mitigate, and in this sense the term
“duty to mitigate” is misleading. However, if the
plaintiff unreasonably fails to mitigate, its damages
 for breach of contract may be reduced: Janiak
v. Ippolito, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 146, at pp. 166-67;
Darbishire v. Warran, [1963] 1 W.L.R. 1067 (C.A.),
at p. 1075.

[73] The defendant, having breached the contract,
bears the onus of proving that the plaintiff unreasonably
 failed to mitigate its loss: Red Deer College
v. Michaels, [1976] 2 S.C.R. 324, at pp. 330-31;
Roper v. Johnson (1873), L.R. 8 C.P. 167. This entails
 establishing, on a balance of probabilities: (1)
that opportunities to mitigate the loss were available
 to the plaintiff; and (2) that the plaintiff unreasonably
 failed to pursue these opportunities.

[74] Failure to mitigate may not be unreasonable
for a variety of reasons. One such reason may be a
“fair, real, and substantial justification” for claiming
 specific performance: Asamera, at pp. 667-
68. Another may be lack of financial resources:
McGregor on Damages (18th ed. 2009), at para.
7-088. The rules for mitigation “do not require the
injured party to do what he cannot afford to do
when he is seeking to reduce the damages payable
by the wrongdoer”: Lagden v. O’Connor, [2003]
UKHL 64, [2004] 1 All E.R. 277, at para. 51 (per
Lord Hope); see also General Securities Ltd. v.
Don Ingram Ltd., [1940] S.C.R. 670.

[75] Unreasonable failure to mitigate loss reduces
 damages to the extent that mitigation would
have avoided the loss: see Andros Springs v. World
Beauty, [1970] P. 144 (C.A.), at p. 154 (per Lord
Denning). If a mitigation opportunity would only
partially avoid the plaintiff’s loss, then only a par-
tial reduction in damages can be justified.
703
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


III. Opportunity to Mitigate

[76] The trial judge found that the Board had not
discharged its onus of proving that Southcott unreasonably
 failed to mitigate its loss because it did not
establish that the opportunity to mitigate existed.
This finding must stand unless it constitutes palpable
 and overriding error: Housen v. Nikolaisen,
2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, at para. 10.

[77] The Board sought to prove that mitigation
opportunities existed in two ways — through the
testimony of an expert witness and with evidence
of purchases made by other Ballantry companies.

    A. The Evidence of the Expert Witness

[78] The trial judge found that the Board’s expert
witness’s evidence did not establish opportunity to
mitigate the loss.

[79] The Board’s expert presented evidence of
81 parcels of raw land and 49 subdivided properties
 that were purchased in the Greater Toronto
Area (“GTA”) between January 31, 2005 and the
time of trial. The trial judge found a number of
shortcomings in this evidence.

[80] First, there was no evidence that the alleged
properties the expert referred to were actually
available to Southcott; the Board’s expert witness
admitted to being entirely unaware of whether substitute
 property was available to the public for sale
during the period in which the Board suggested
that Southcott could mitigate (A.R., at p. 233).

[81] Second, the evidence did not establish that
these properties were comparable to Southcott’s
target property ((2009), 78 R.P.R. (4th) 285, at para.
144). Little was known about the properties identi-
fied by the Board’s expert witness beyond their size,
cost, and nearest major intersection. Most were
outside the City of Toronto. The properties vary
widely in both size and price, including parcels as
704


large as 123.988 acres, as small as 0.251 acres, and
costing as much as $23.77 million. The trial judge
concluded that the comparability of these properties
 to Southcott’s 4.78 acre target property had not
been established.

[82] Third, the trial judge found that the evidence
did not establish that alternate properties could
have been profitably developed (para. 144). Only a
profitable development would mitigate Southcott’s
loss; an unprofitable one would aggravate it. A
plaintiff is not required to take foolish steps that
would not reduce its loss. The Board’s expert presented
 no evidence on the potential profitability of
the properties he referred to.

[83] The Court of Appeal criticized the trial
judge’s finding that the evidence did not establish
 profitability, on the ground that he raised
the burden of proof on the Board to an unrealistic
 level (2010 ONCA 310, 104 O.R. (3d) 784, at
para. 25). With respect, the burden was clear —
the Board had to establish that alternate properties
could have been profitably developed on a balance
of probabilities. There is no indication that the trial
judge failed to appreciate this basic principle. See
World Beauty, at p. 154.

[84] The trial judge found that the Board’s expert
witness failed to establish that Southcott had opportunities
 to mitigate its loss. This finding finds
support in the evidence and is not vitiated by legal
error. It follows that it cannot be set aside: Housen.

      B. The Evidence of Purchases by Other
         Ballantry Companies

[85] The second way the Board sought to dis-
charge its onus of showing opportunity to mitigate
was by evidence that other Ballantry companies
had made purchases of development land in the
GTA at the relevant time. The Board argued that
705
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


these other Ballantry purchases had in fact mitigated
 the loss caused by the Board’s breach.

[86] The trial judge accepted the Board’s in-
vitation to consider the matter from the perspec-
tive of the Ballantry Group as a whole, effectively
 piercing the corporate veil. He concluded that
Ballantry’s subsequent purchases were collateral
, independent transactions that could not have
avoided the loss arising from the Board’s breach
of contract (para. 143): see Apeco of Canada, Ltd.
v. Windmill Place, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 385, at p. 389.
Leaving aside the question of whether piercing the
corporate veil in these circumstances was appropriate
, the trial judge’s analysis was not in error.
The trial judge’s reasoning was that the Ballantry
Group, with extensive access to credit, was limited
only by the number of properties it could find. The
more good properties it could find, the more money
 it stood to make. In this sense, other purchases
by the Ballantry Group were collateral rather than
substitutions for the Board’s property.

[87] The trial judge, having dealt with the purchases
 of other Ballantry companies in this way,
did not make a finding on whether these properties
 offered mitigation opportunities for Southcott,
as an independent legal entity. The evidence, however
, does not support such a finding, in my view.
First, there was no evidence that the properties purchased
 by other Ballantry companies were available
 to Southcott. At best, Southcott would have
been competing with its sister companies for these
properties. Whether it would have succeeded in
acquiring a comparable property was a matter of
speculation.

[88] Second, the evidence did not establish that
other Ballantry Group purchases were comparable
to Southcott’s target property. Under its contract
706


with the Board, Southcott was purchasing a 4.78
acre parcel located in a desirable residential neigh-
bourhood of the City of Toronto suited to the development
 of 48 semi-detached residential units (para.
132). There was no evidence that any of the other
Ballantry purchases were comparable. It is not
enough to show that some development land may
have been available to companies which may have
had different development strategies. Ballantry
had wide ranging interests in residential real estate
development throughout the GTA. Southcott had a
narrower, specific development objective. To show
opportunity to mitigate, the Board had to prove that
a property comparable to the one that Southcott
sought to purchase was available.

[89] I respectfully cannot agree that two of the subsequent
 Ballantry purchases were clearly comparable
 to Southcott’s target property (Karakatsanis J.,
at para. 56). The first (a parcel of 2.7 acres for $3.3
million) was 43 percent smaller than Southcott’s
target property, cost 70 percent more per acre, and
was purchased for the development of a retirement
home. The second (a parcel of 2.3 acres for $6 million
) was 51 percent smaller than Southcott’s target
property, cost 260 percent more per acre, and was
purchased for development of a high rise building.
On the record, these properties were not comparable
 to the property that Southcott sought to acquire
: a 4.78 acre parcel suited to the development
of 48 semi-detached residential units. The remain-
ing Ballantry purchases were even less comparable
to Southcott’s target property. The Board had the
burden of establishing the comparability of these
properties. It failed to do so.

[90] I see no error in the trial judge’s conclusion
that the evidence as to other Ballantry properties
did not establish opportunities to mitigate the loss
suffered as a result of the Board’s breach of contract
.
707
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


IV. Did Southcott Act Reasonably?

[91] The trial judge’s finding that the Board
failed to establish that Southcott had opportunities
to mitigate its loss is sufficient to dispose of the
appeal. However, I offer the following comments
on whether the Board established, as it was also
required to do, that failure to take advantage of any
proven opportunities for mitigation was unreasonable
.

[92] In my view, it is difficult to conclude that
Southcott acted unreasonably. The first reason is
that it had a “fair, real, and substantial justification”
for claiming specific performance of the contract:
Asamera, at pp. 667-68. In such circumstances, a
plaintiff is not required to mitigate. As explained in
Asamera, this is simply an application of the rule of
mitigation requiring the plaintiff to act reasonably
in the circumstances:

Where those circumstances reveal a substantial and legitimate
 interest in seeking performance as opposed to
damages, then a plaintiff will be able to justify his inaction
 and on failing in his plea for specific performance
might then recover losses which in other circumstances
might be classified as avoidable and thus unrecoverable
 . . . . [pp. 668-69]

[93] The act of filing a claim for specific performance
 is inconsistent with the act of acquiring
a substitute property. A plaintiff, acting reasonably
, cannot pursue specific performance and mitigate
 its loss at the same time. It makes no sense
for a reasonable plaintiff seeking specific performance
 to effectively concede defeat and buy
a substitute property. The plaintiff could end up
with two properties — one it wanted and one it
did not. Furthermore, an action for specific performance
 is often motivated by the unavailabili-
ty of substitutes in the marketplace. A plaintiff’s
reasonable claim that substitutes are unavailable
is inconsistent with the ability to acquire a substitute
 in the marketplace (E. Yorio, “A Defense
708


of Equitable Defenses” (1990), 51 Ohio St. L.J.
1201).

[94] In the end, the trial judge dismissed the claim
for specific performance. However, that does not
mean that Southcott acted unreasonably in pursuing
 the claim. Whether a plaintiff had a “fair, real,
and substantial justification” for maintaining a specific
 performance claim is a different question from
whether specific performance should be granted at
the conclusion of the trial when all the evidence is
in and appraised by the trial judge. Plaintiffs can
never be certain that an action for specific performance
 will succeed, particularly as this is an equitable
, discretionary remedy. Demanding that losses
be mitigated unless success in obtaining specific
performance is assured would deter valid claims
for specific performance and hold plaintiffs to an
impossible standard.

[95] The trial judge, while ultimately reject-
ing Southcott’s claim for specific performance,
did not find that Southcott acted unreasonably in
pursuing that remedy. Nor does there appear to be
a basis for such a finding. It can be fairly argued
that Southcott did not act unreasonably in pursuing
specific performance of the contract. The property
was uniquely suited to Southcott’s needs for single-
family residential development within the City of
Toronto. Though the common law presumption of
the uniqueness of real property no longer holds, a
claim for specific performance may still be reasonable
 if a property has unique characteristics such
that a substitute property is not readily available:
Semelhago v. Paramadevan, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 415,
at para. 22. Southcott’s contention that there was
no comparable substitute property found support in
the evidence.

[96] Another reason for failing to acquire and
develop a substitute property, assuming such a
709
[2012] 2 R.C.S.


property had been available, is that Southcott lacked
financial resources. Southcott did not have the financial
 capacity to go into the market and purchase
a substitute property. It was a single-purpose company
 with no assets other than the $344,000 advanced
 to it by Ballantry for the deposit on the target
 property (trial judgment, at para. 137). Whether
it could have obtained financing to buy a different
property is at the very least speculative.

[97] In summary, I see no basis for concluding
that Southcott acted unreasonably in failing to mitigate
 its loss, assuming that opportunities to do so
were available.

V. Conclusion

[98] I see no basis upon which to set aside the
trial judge’s conclusion that the defendant did not
prove that the plaintiff unreasonably failed to mitigate
 its loss. His conclusions find support in the
evidence and the law.

[99] I would allow the appeal and restore the
judgment of the trial judge.

  Appeal dismissed with costs. Cross-appeal dismissed
 without costs, McLachlin C.J. dissenting.

  Solicitors for the appellant/respondent on cross-
appeal: Lenczner Slaght Royce Smith Griffin,
Toronto; Davis Moldaver, Toronto.

  Solicitors for the respondent/appellant on cross-
appeal: Miller Thomson, Toronto.
