69
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


Tercon Contractors Ltd.

v.

Her Majesty The Queen in Right of the
Province of British Columbia, by her Ministry
of Transportation and Highways Respondent

and

Attorney General of Ontario Intervener

Indexed as: Tercon Contractors Ltd. v.
British Columbia (Transportation and
Highways)
2010 SCC 4
File No.: 32460.
2009: March 23; 2010: February 12.
Present: McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps,
Fish, Abella, Charron, Rothstein and Cromwell JJ.

ON APPEAL FROM THE COURT OF APPEAL FOR
BRITISH COLUMBIA
   Contracts — Breach of terms — Tender — Ineligible
 bidder — Exclusion of liability clause — Doctrine
of fundamental breach — Province issuing tender call
for construction of highway — Request for proposals
restricting qualified bidders to six proponents — Province
 accepting bid from ineligible bidder — Exclusion
clause protecting Province from liability arising from
participation in tendering process — Whether Province
breached terms of tendering contract in entertaining
bid from ineligible bidder — If so, whether Province’s
conduct fell within terms of exclusion clause — If so,
whether court should nevertheless refuse to enforce the
exclusion clause because of unconscionability or some
other contravention of public policy.
   The Province of British Columbia issued a request
for expressions of interest (“RFEI”) for the design and
construction of a highway. Six teams responded with
submissions including Tercon and Brentwood. A few
months later, the Province informed the six proponents
70


that it now intended to design the highway itself and
issued a request for proposals (“RFP”) for its construction
. The RFP set out a specifically defined project and
contemplated that proposals would be evaluated according
 to specific criteria. Under its terms, only the six
original proponents were eligible to submit a proposal;
those received from any other party would not be considered
. The RFP also included an exclusion of liability
clause which provided: “Except as expressly and specifically
 permitted in these Instructions to Proponents, no
Proponent shall have any claim for compensation of any
kind whatsoever, as a result of participating in this RFP,
and by submitting a Proposal each Proponent shall be
deemed to have agreed that it has no claim.” As it lacked
expertise in drilling and blasting, Brentwood entered
into a pre-bidding agreement with another construction
company (“EAC”), which was not a qualified bidder,
to undertake the work as a joint venture. This arrangement
 allowed Brentwood to prepare a more competitive
proposal. Ultimately, Brentwood submitted a bid in its
own name with EAC listed as a “major member” of the
team. Brentwood and Tercon were the two short-listed
proponents and the Province selected Brentwood for the
project. Tercon successfully brought an action in damages
 against the Province. The trial judge found that the
Brentwood bid was, in fact, submitted by a joint venture
of Brentwood and EAC and that the Province, which
was aware of the situation, breached the express provisions
 of the tendering contract with Tercon by considering
 a bid from an ineligible bidder and by awarding
it the work. She also held that, as a matter of construction
, the exclusion clause did not bar recovery for the
breaches she had found. The clause was ambiguous and
she resolved this ambiguity in Tercon’s favour. She held
that the Province’s breach was fundamental and that
it was not fair or reasonable to enforce the exclusion
clause in light of the Province’s breach. The Court of
Appeal set aside the decision, holding that the exclusion
clause was clear and unambiguous and barred compensation
 for all defaults.
   Held (McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, Abella and
Rothstein JJ. dissenting): The appeal should be allowed.
The Court agreed on the appropriate framework of
analysis but divided on the applicability of the exclusion
 clause to the facts.
  The Court: With respect to the appropriate framework
 of analysis the doctrine of fundamental breach
71
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


should be “laid to rest”. The following analysis should
be applied when a plaintiff seeks to escape the effect of
an exclusion clause or other contractual terms to which
it had previously agreed. The first issue is whether, as
a matter of interpretation, the exclusion clause even
applies to the circumstances established in evidence.
This will depend on the court’s interpretation of the
intention of the parties as expressed in the contract. If
the exclusion clause applies, the second issue is whether
the exclusion clause was unconscionable and thus
invalid at the time the contract was made. If the exclusion
 clause is held to be valid at the time of contract
formation and applicable to the facts of the case, a third
enquiry may be raised as to whether the court should
nevertheless refuse to enforce the exclusion clause
because of an overriding public policy. The burden of
persuasion lies on the party seeking to avoid enforcement
 of the clause to demonstrate an abuse of the freedom
 of contract that outweighs the very strong public
interest in their enforcement. Conduct approaching
serious criminality or egregious fraud are but examples
of well-accepted considerations of public policy that are
substantially incontestable and may override the public
policy of freedom to contract and disable the defendant
 from relying upon the exclusion clause. Despite
agreement on the appropriate framework of analysis,
the court divided on the applicability of the exclusion
clause to the facts of this case as set out below.
    Per LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Charron and Cromwell
JJ.: The Province breached the express provisions of the
tendering contract with Tercon by accepting a bid from
a party who should not even have been permitted to participate
 in the tender process and by ultimately awarding
the work to that ineligible bidder. This egregious conduct
 by the Province also breached the implied duty of
fairness to bidders. The exclusion clause, which barred
claims for compensation “as a result of participating”
in the tendering process, did not, when properly interpreted
, exclude Tercon’s claim for damages. By considering
 a bid from an ineligible bidder, the Province
not only acted in a way that breached the express and
implied terms of the contract, it did so in a manner that
was an affront to the integrity and business efficacy of
the tendering process.
    Submitting a compliant bid in response to a tender
call may give rise to “Contract A” between the bidder
and the owner. Whether a Contract A arises and what
its terms are depends on the express and implied terms
and conditions of the tender call and the legal consequences
 of the parties’ actual dealings in each case.
72


Here, there is no basis to interfere with the trial judge’s
findings that there was an intent to create contractual
obligations upon submission of a compliant bid and that
only the six original proponents that qualified through
the RFEI process were eligible to submit a response to
the RFP. The tender documents and the required ministerial
 approval of the process stated expressly that the
Province was contractually bound to accept bids only
from eligible bidders. Contract A therefore could not
arise by the submission of a bid from any other party.
The trial judge found that the joint venture of Brentwood
and EAC was not eligible to bid as they had not simply
changed the composition of their team but, in effect,
had created a new bidder. The Province fully understood
 this and would not consider a bid from or award
the work to that joint venture. The trial judge did not
err in finding that in fact, if not in form, Brentwood’s
bid was on behalf of a joint venture between itself and
EAC. The joint venture provided Brentwood with a
competitive advantage in the bidding process and was
a material consideration in favour of the Brentwood bid
during the Province’s evaluation process. Moreover, the
Province took active steps to obfuscate the reality of the
true nature of the Brentwood bid. The bid by the joint
venture constituted “material non-compliance” with
the tendering contract and breached both the express
eligibility provisions of the tender documents, and the
implied duty to act fairly towards all bidders.
    When the exclusion clause is interpreted in harmony
with the rest of the RFP and in light of the commercial
 context of the tendering process, it did not exclude
a damages claim resulting from the Province unfairly
permitting an ineligible bidder to participate in the
tendering process. The closed list of bidders was the
foundation of this RFP and the parties should, at the
very least, be confident that their initial bids will not be
skewed by some underlying advantage in the drafting
of the call for tenders conferred only upon one potential
 bidder. The requirement that only compliant bids be
considered and the implied obligation to treat bidders
fairly are factors that contribute to the integrity and
business efficacy of the tendering process. The parties
did not intend, through the words found in this exclusion
clause, to waive compensation for conduct, like that of
the Province in this case, that strikes at the heart of the
tendering process. Clear language would be necessary
to exclude liability for breach of the implied obligation,
particularly in the case of public procurement where
73
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


transparency is essential. Furthermore, the restric-
tion on eligibility of bidders was a key element of the
alternative process approved by the Minister. When
the statutory provisions which governed the tendering
process in this case are considered, it seems unlikely
that the parties intended through this exclusion clause
to effectively gut a key aspect of the approved process.
The text of the exclusion clause in the RFP addresses
claims that result from “participating in this RFP”.
Central to “participating in this RFP” was participating
 in a contest among those eligible to participate. A
process involving other bidders — the process followed
by the Province — is not the process called for by “this
RFP” and being part of that other process is not in any
meaningful sense “participating in this RFP”.
    Per McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, Abella and Rothstein
JJ. (dissenting): The Ministry’s conduct, while in breach
of its contractual obligations, fell within the terms of
the exclusion compensation clause. The clause is clear
and unambiguous and no legal ground or rule of law
permits a court to override the freedom of the parties
to contract with respect to this particular term, or to
relieve Tercon against its operation in this case. A court
has no discretion to refuse to enforce a valid and applicable
 contractual term unless the plaintiff can point to
some paramount consideration of public policy sufficient
 to override the public interest in freedom of contact
 and defeat what would otherwise be the contractual
rights of the parties. The public interest in the transparency
 and integrity of the government tendering process
, while important, did not render unenforceable the
terms of the contract Tercon agreed to.
    Brentwood was a legitimate competitor in the RFP
process and all bidders knew that the road contract
would not be performed by the proponent alone and
required a large “team” of different trades and person-
nel to perform. The issue was whether EAC would be
on the job as a major sub-contractor or identified with
Brentwood as a joint venture “proponent” with EAC.
Tercon has legitimate reason to complain about the
Ministry’s conduct, but its misconduct did not rise to
the level where public policy would justify the court in
depriving the Ministry of the protection of the exclusion
 of compensation clause freely agreed to by Tercon
in the contract.
74


   Contract A is based not on some abstract externally
imposed rule of law but on the presumed (and occasionally
 implied) intent of the parties. At issue is the
intention of the actual parties not what the court may
project in hindsight would have been the intention of
reasonable parties. Only in rare circumstances will a
court relieve a party from the bargain it has made.
    The exclusion clause did not run afoul of the statutory
 requirements. While the Ministry of Transportation
and Highways Act favours “the integrity of the tendering
 process”, it nowhere prohibits the parties from negotiating
 a “no claims” clause as part of their commercial
agreement and cannot plausibly be interpreted to have
that effect. Tercon — a sophisticated and experienced
contractor — chose to bid on the project, including the
risk posed by an exclusion of compensation clause, on
the terms proposed by the Ministry. That was its prerogative
 and nothing in the “policy of the Act” barred
the parties’ agreement on that point.
   The trial judge found that Contract A was breached
when the RFP process was not conducted by the
Ministry with the degree of fairness and transparency
that the terms of Contract A entitled Tercon to expect.
The Ministry was at fault in its performance of the RFP,
but the process did not thereby cease to be the RFP process
 in which Tercon had elected to participate.
    The interpretation of the majority on this point is
disagreed with. “[P]articipating in this RFP” began
with “submitting a Proposal” for consideration. The
RFP process consisted of more than the final selection
 of the winning bid and Tercon participated in it.
Tercon’s bid was considered. To deny that such participation
 occurred on the ground that in the end the
Ministry chose a Brentwood joint venture (an ineligible
 bidder) instead of Brentwood itself (an eligible
bidder) would be to give the clause a strained and artificial
 interpretation in order, indirectly and obliquely,
to avoid the impact of what may seem to the majority
ex post facto to have been an unfair and unreasonable
clause.
    Moreover, the exclusion clause was not unconscionable
. While the Ministry and Tercon do not exercise the
same level of power and authority, Tercon is a major
contractor and is well able to look after itself in a commercial
 context so there is no relevant imbalance of
bargaining power. Further, the clause is not as draconian
 as Tercon portrays it. Other remedies for breach of
Contract A were available. The parties expected, even
if they did not like it, that the “no claims” clause would
75
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


operate even where the eligibility criteria in respect
of the bid (including the bidder) were not complied
with.
    Finally, the Ministry’s misconduct did not rise to
the level where public policy would justify the court in
depriving the Ministry of the protection of the exclusion
 of compensation clause freely agreed to by Tercon
in the contract.
Cases Cited
By Cromwell J.
   Applied: M.J.B. Enterprises Ltd. v. Defence
Construction (1951) Ltd., [1999] 1 S.C.R. 619; Martel
Building Ltd. v. Canada, 2000 SCC 60, [2000] 2 S.C.R.
860; considered: Hunter Engineering Co. v. Syncrude
Canada Ltd., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 426; Cahill (G.J.) & Co.
(1979) Ltd. v. Newfoundland and Labrador (Minister of
Municipal and Provincial Affairs), 2005 NLTD 129, 250
Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 145; Guarantee Co. of North America
v. Gordon Capital Corp., [1999] 3 S.C.R. 423; Fraser
Jewellers (1982) Ltd. v. Dominion Electric Protection
Co. (1997), 34 O.R. (3d) 1; referred to: Canadian
Pacific Hotels Ltd. v. Bank of Montreal, [1987] 1 S.C.R.
711; Double N Earthmovers Ltd. v. Edmonton (City),
2007 SCC 3, [2007] 1 S.C.R. 116; Hillis Oil and Sales
Ltd. v. Wynn’s Canada, Ltd., [1986] 1 S.C.R. 57.
By Binnie J. (dissenting)
   Hunter Engineering Co. v. Syncrude Canada Ltd.,
[1989] 1 S.C.R. 426; The Queen in right of Ontario
v. Ron Engineering & Construction (Eastern) Ltd.,
[1981] 1 S.C.R. 111; M.J.B. Enterprises Ltd. v. Defence
Construction (1951) Ltd., [1999] 1 S.C.R. 619; Naylor
Group Inc. v. Ellis-Don Construction Ltd., 2001
SCC 58, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 943; Martel Building Ltd. v.
Canada, 2000 SCC 60, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 860; Double
N Earthmovers Ltd. v. Edmonton (City), 2007 SCC 3,
[2007] 1 S.C.R. 116; Tercon Contractors Ltd. v. British
Columbia (1993), 9 C.L.R. (2d) 197, aff’d [1994] B.C.J.
No. 2658 (QL); Karsales (Harrow) Ltd. v. Wallis, [1956] 1
W.L.R. 936; Guarantee Co. of North America v. Gordon
Capital Corp., [1999] 3 S.C.R. 423; ABB Inc. v. Domtar
Inc., 2007 SCC 50, [2007] 3 S.C.R. 461; Re Millar Estate,
[1938] S.C.R. 1; Plas-Tex Canada Ltd. v. Dow Chemical
of Canada Ltd., 2004 ABCA 309, 245 D.L.R. (4th) 650.
Statutes and Regulations Cited
Ministry of Transportation and Highways Act, R.S.B.C.
  1996, c. 311, ss. 4, 23.
76


Authors Cited
Hall, Geoff R. Canadian Contractual Interpretation
  Law. Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2007.
Kain, Brandon, and Douglas T. Yoshida. “The Doctrine
  of Public Policy in Canadian Contract Law”, in Todd
  L. Archibald and Randall Scott Echlin, eds., Annual
  Review of Civil Litigation, 2007. Toronto: Thomson
  Carswell, 2007, 1.
McCamus, John D. The Law of Contracts. Toronto: Irwin
  Law, 2005.
Waddams, S. M. The Law of Contracts, 5th ed. Aurora,
  Ont.: Canada Law Book, 2005.

   APPEAL from a judgment of the British
Columbia Court of Appeal (Donald, Mackenzie
and Lowry JJ.A.), 2007 BCCA 592, 73 B.C.L.R.
(4th) 201, 40 B.L.R. (4th) 26, 289 D.L.R. (4th) 647,
[2008] 2 W.W.R. 410, 249 B.C.A.C. 103, 414 W.A.C.
103, 66 C.L.R. (3d) 1, [2007] B.C.J. No. 2558 (QL),
2007 CarswellBC 2880, setting aside a decision
of Dillon J., 2006 BCSC 499, 53 B.C.L.R. (4th)
138, [2006] 6 W.W.R. 275, 18 B.L.R. (4th) 88, 51
C.L.R. (3d) 227, [2006] B.C.J. No. 657 (QL), 2006
CarswellBC 730. Appeal allowed, McLachlin C.J.
and Binnie, Abella and Rothstein JJ. dissenting.

   Chris R. Armstrong, Brian G. McLean, William
S. McLean and Marie-France Major, for the appellant
.

  J. Edward Gouge, Q.C., Jonathan Eades and
Kate Hamm, for the respondent.

   Malliha Wilson and Lucy McSweeney, for the
intervener.

  The judgment of LeBel, Deschamps, Fish,
Charron and Cromwell JJ. was delivered by

     CROMWELL J. —

I.

[1] The Province accepted a bid from a bidder
who was not eligible to participate in the tender
and then took steps to ensure that this fact was not
disclosed. The main question on appeal, as I see
it, is whether the Province succeeded in excluding
77
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


its liability for damages flowing from this conduct
through an exclusion clause it inserted into the contract
. I share the view of the trial judge that it did
not.

[2] The appeal arises out of a tendering contract
 between the appellant, Tercon Contractors
Ltd., who was the bidder, and the respondent, Her
Majesty the Queen in Right of the Province of
British Columbia, who issued the tender call. The
case turns on the interpretation of provisions in the
contract relating to eligibility to bid and exclusion
of compensation resulting from participation in the
tendering process.

[3] The trial judge found that the respondent
(which I will refer to as the Province) breached the
express provisions of the tendering contract with
Tercon by accepting a bid from another party who
was not eligible to bid and by ultimately awarding
the work to that ineligible bidder. In short, a bid
was accepted and the work awarded to a party who
should not even have been permitted to participate
in the tender process. The judge also found that this
and related conduct by the Province breached the
implied duty of fairness to bidders, holding that the
Province had acted “egregiously” (2006 BCSC 499,
53 B.C.L.R. (4th) 138, at para. 150). The judge then
turned to the Province’s defence based on an exclusion
 clause that barred claims for compensation “as
a result of participating” in the tendering process.
She held that this clause, properly interpreted, did
not exclude Tercon’s claim for damages. In effect,
she held that it was not within the contemplation of
the parties that this clause would bar a remedy in
damages arising from the Province’s unfair dealings
 with a party who was not entitled to participate
 in the tender in the first place.

[4] The Province appealed and the Court of
Appeal reversed (2007 BCCA 592, 73 B.C.L.R.
(4th) 201). Dealing only with the exclusion clause
issue, it held that the clause was clear and unambiguous
 and barred compensation for all defaults.
78


[5] On Tercon’s appeal to this Court, the questions
 for us are whether the successful bidder was
eligible to participate in the request for proposals
(“RFP”) and, if not, whether Tercon’s claim for
damages is barred by the exclusion clause.
[6] In my respectful view, the trial judge reached
the right result on both issues. The Province’s
attempts to persuade us that it did not breach the
tendering contract are, in my view, wholly unsuccessful
. The foundation of the tendering contract
was that only six, pre-selected bidders would be
permitted to participate in the bidding. As the trial
judge held, the Province not only acted in a way
that breached the express and implied terms of the
contract by considering a bid from an ineligible
bidder, it did so in a manner that was an affront to
the integrity and business efficacy of the tendering
 process. One must not lose sight of the fact that
the trial judge found that the Province acted egregiously
 by “ensuring that [the true bidder] was not
disclosed” (para. 150) and that its breach “attacke[d]
the underlying premise of the [tendering] process”
(para. 146), a process which was set out in detail in
the contract and, in addition, had been given ministerial
 approval as required by statute.
[7] As for its reliance on the exclusion clause, the
Province submits that the parties were free to agree
to limitations of liability and did so. Consideration
of this submission requires an interpretation of the
words of the clause to which the parties agreed in
the context of the contract as a whole. My view is
that, properly interpreted, the exclusion clause does
not protect the Province from Tercon’s damage
claim which arises from the Province’s dealings
with a party not even eligible to bid, let alone from
its breach of the implied duty of fairness to bidders
. In other words, the Province’s liability did not
arise from Tercon’s participation in the process that
the Province established, but from the Province’s
unfair dealings with a party who was not entitled
to participate in that process.
[8] I would allow the appeal and restore the judgment
 of the trial judge.
79
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


II. Brief Overview of the Facts
[9] I will have to set out more factual detail as part
of my analysis. For now, a very brief summary will
suffice. In 2000, the Ministry of Transportation
and Highways (also referred to as the “Province”)
issued a request for expressions of interest (“RFEI”)
for designing and building a highway in northwest-
ern British Columbia. Six teams made submissions,
including Tercon and Brentwood Enterprises Ltd.
Later that year, the Province informed the six proponents
 that it now intended to design the highway
itself and would issue a RFP for its construction.
[10] The RFP was formally issued on January 15,
2001. Under its terms, only the six original proponents
 were eligible to submit a proposal. The
RFP also included a clause excluding all claims for
damages “as a result of participating in this RFP”
(s. 2.10).
[11] Unable to submit a competitive bid on its
own, Brentwood teamed up with Emil Anderson
Construction Co. (“EAC”), which was not a qualified
 bidder, and together they submitted a bid in
Brentwood’s name. Brentwood and Tercon were
the two short-listed proponents and the Ministry
ultimately selected Brentwood as the preferred proponent
.
[12] Tercon brought an action seeking damages
, alleging that the Ministry had considered
and accepted an ineligible bid and that, but for that
breach, it would have been awarded the contract.
The trial judge agreed and awarded roughly $3.5
million in damages and prejudgment interest. As
noted, the Court of Appeal reversed and Tercon
appeals by leave of the Court.
III. Issues
[13] The issues for decision are whether the trial
judge erred in finding that:
1.
     entertaining a bid from an ineligible bidder.
80


2. the exclusion clause does not bar the appellant
   ’s claim for damages for the breaches of the
   tendering contract found by the trial judge.

IV. Analysis

A. Was the Brentwood Bid Ineligible?

[14] The first issue is whether the Brentwood bid
was from an eligible bidder. The judge found that
the bid was in substance, although not in form, from
a joint venture of Brentwood and EAC and that it
was, therefore, an ineligible bid. The Province
attacks this finding on three grounds:

(i) a joint venture is not a legal person and therefore
     the Province could not and did not contract
    with a joint venture;

(ii) it did not award the contract to EAC and EAC
     had no contractual responsibility to the Province
      for failure to perform the contract;

(iii) there was no term of the RFP that restricted
      the right of proponents to enter into joint venture
       agreements with others; this arrangement
      merely left Brentwood, the original proponent,
      in place and allowed it to enhance its ability to
      perform the work.

[15] While these were the Province’s main points,
its position became more wide-ranging during oral
argument, at times suggesting that it had no contractual
 obligation to deal only with eligible bidders
. It is therefore necessary to take a step back
and look at that threshold point before turning to
the Province’s more focussed submissions.

     1.
          the Bidding Process

[16] The judge found, and it was uncontested
at trial, that only the six original proponents that
81
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


qualified through the RFEI process were eligible
to submit a response to the RFP. This finding is not
challenged on appeal, although there was a passing
suggestion during oral argument that there was no
contractual obligation of this sort at all. The trial
judge also held, noting that this point was uncontested
, that a joint venture between Brentwood
and EAC was ineligible to bid. This is also not
contested on appeal. These two findings are criti-
cal to the case and provide important background
for an issue that is in dispute, namely whether the
Brentwood bid was ineligible. It is, therefore, worth
reviewing the relevant background in detail. I first
briefly set out the legal framework and then turn to
the trial judge’s findings.

    2. Legal Principles

[17] Submitting a compliant bid in response to
a tender call may give rise to a contract — called
Contract A — between the bidder and the owner, the
express terms of which are found in the tender documents
. The contract may also have implied terms
according to the principles set out in Canadian
Pacific Hotels Ltd. v. Bank of Montreal, [1987]
1 S.C.R. 711; see also M.J.B. Enterprises Ltd. v.
Defence Construction (1951) Ltd., [1999] 1 S.C.R.
619, and Martel Building Ltd. v. Canada, 2000
SCC 60, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 860. The key word, however
, is “may”. The Contract A/Contract B framework
 is one that arises, if at all, from the dealings
between the parties. It is not an artificial construct
 imposed by the courts, but a description of
the legal consequences of the parties’ actual dealings
. The Court emphasized in M.J.B. that whether
Contract A arises and if it does, what its terms are,
depend on the express and implied terms and conditions
 of the tender call in each case. As Iacobucci
J. put it, at para. 19:

   What is important . . . is that the submission of a
tender in response to an invitation to tender may give
82


rise to contractual obligations, quite apart from the obligations
 associated with the construction contract to be
entered into upon the acceptance of a tender, depending
upon whether the parties intend to initiate contractual
relations by the submission of a bid. If such a contract
arises, its terms are governed by the terms and conditions
 of the tender call. [Emphasis added.]

     3. The Trial Judge’s Findings Concerning
        the Existence of Contract A

[18] The question of whether Tercon’s submission
of a compliant bid gave rise to contractual relations
between it and the Province was contested by the
Province at trial. The trial judge gave extensive reasons
 for finding against the Province on this issue.
We are told that the Province did not pursue this
point in the Court of Appeal but instead premised
its submissions on the existence of Contract A. The
Province took the same approach in its written submissions
 in this Court. However, during oral argument
, there was some passing reference in response
to questions that there was no Contract A. In light of
the position taken by the Province on its appeal to
the Court of Appeal and in its written submissions
in this Court, it is now too late to revisit whether
there were contractual duties between Tercon and
the Province. Even if it were open to the Province
to make this argument now, I can see no error in
legal principle or any palpable and overriding error
of fact in the trial judge’s careful reasons on this
point.

[19] The trial judge did not mechanically impose
the Contract A/Contract B framework, but considered
 whether Contract A arose in light of her
detailed analysis of the dealings between the parties
. That was the right approach. She reviewed in
detail the provisions of the RFP which supported
her conclusion that there was an intent to create
contractual relations upon submission of a compliant
 bid. She noted, for example, that bids were
to be irrevocable for 60 days and that security of
$50,000 had to be paid by all proponents and was to
be increased to $200,000 by the successful proponent
. Any revisions to proposals prior to the closing
 date had to be in writing, properly executed and
received before the closing time. The RFP also set
83
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


out detailed evaluation criteria and specified that
they were to be the only criteria to be used to eval-
uate proposals. A specific form of alliance agreement
 was attached. There were detailed provisions
about pricing that were fixed and non-negotiable.
A proponent was required to accept this form of
contract substantially, and security was lost if an
agreement was not executed. The Ministry reserved
a right to cancel the RFP under s. 2.9 but in such
event was obliged to reimburse proponents for costs
incurred in preparing their bids up to $15,000 each.
Proponents had to submit a signed proposal form,
which established that they offered to execute an
agreement substantially in the form included in the
RFP package. Further, they acknowledged that the
security could be forfeited if they were selected
as the preferred proponent and failed to enter into
good faith discussions with the Ministry to reach
an agreement and sign the alliance agreement.

[20] In summary, as the trial judge found, the
RFP set out a specifically defined project, invited
proposals from a closed and specific list of eligible
 proponents, and contemplated that proposals
would be evaluated according to specific criteria.
Negotiation of the alliance construction contract
was required, but the negotiation was constrained
and did not go to the fundamental details of either
the procurement process or the ultimate contract.

[21] There is, therefore, no basis to interfere
with the judge’s finding that there was an intent
to create contractual obligations upon submission
 of a compliant bid. I add, however, that the
tender call in this case did not give rise to the clas-
sic Contract A/Contract B framework in which
the bidder submits an irrevocable bid and under-
takes to enter into Contract B on those terms if
it is accepted. The alliance model process which
was used here was more complicated than that and
involved good faith negotiations for a Contract B
in the form set out in the tender documents. But in
my view, this should not distract us from the main
question here. We do not have to spell out all of the
terms of Contract A, let alone of Contract B, so as
to define all of the duties and obligations of both
84


the bidders and the Province. The question here is
much narrower: did contractual obligations arise as
a result of Tercon’s compliant bid and, if so, was
it a term of that contract that the Province would
only entertain bids from eligible bidders? The trial
judge found offer, acceptance and consideration in
the invitation to tender and Tercon’s bid. There is
no basis, in my respectful view, to challenge that
finding even if it were open to the Province to try
to do so at this late stage of the litigation.

     4. The Trial Judge’s Finding Concerning
        Eligibility

[22] It was not contested at trial that only the
six original proponents that qualified through the
RFEI process were eligible to bid. This point is not
in issue on appeal; the question is what this eligibility
 requirement means. It will be helpful, therefore,
to set out the background about this limited eligibility
 to bid in this tendering process.

[23] To begin, it is worth repeating that there is
no doubt that the Province was contractually bound
to accept bids only from eligible bidders. This duty
may be implied even absent express stipulation. For
example, in M.J.B., the Court found that an implied
obligation to accept only compliant bids was necessary
 to give business efficacy to the tendering process
, noting, at para. 41, that a bidder must expend
effort and incur expense in preparing its bid and
must submit bid security and that it is “obvious”
that it makes “little sense” for the bidder to comply
with these requirements if the owner “is allowed,
in effect, to circumscribe this process and accept a
non-compliant bid”. But again, whether such a duty
should be implied in any given case will depend
on the dealings between the parties. Here, however,
there is no need to rely on implied terms. The obligation
 to consider only bids from eligible bidders
85
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


was stated expressly in the tender documents and
in the required ministerial approval of the process
which they described.

[24] As noted, in early 2000, the Province issued
a RFEI based on a design-build model; the contractor
 would both design and build the highway. The
RFEI contemplated that a short list of three qualified
 contractors, or teams composed of contractors
 and consultants, would be nominated as proponents
. Each was to provide a description of the legal
structure of the team and to describe the role of
each team member along with the extent of involvement
 of each team member as a percentage of the
total scope of the project and an organization chart
showing each team member’s role. Any change in
team management or key positions required notice
in writing to the Province which reserved the right
to disqualify the proponent if the change materi-
ally and negatively affected the ability of the team
to carry out the project.

[25] Expressions of interest (“EOI”) were received
from six teams including Tercon and Brentwood.
The evaluation panel and independent review panel
recommended a short list of three proponents with
Tercon topping the evaluation. Brentwood was evaluated
 fifth and was not on the short list. Brentwood
was known to lack expertise in drilling and blasting
 and so its EOI had included an outline of the
key team members with that experience. EAC did
not participate and had no role in the Brentwood
submission. The results of this evaluation were not
communicated and the process did not proceed
because the Province decided to design the project
itself and issue an RFP for an alliance model contract
 to construct the highway.

[26] It was clear from the outset that only those
who had submitted proposals during the RFEI process
 would be eligible to submit proposals under
the RFP. This was specified in the approval of
the process by the Minister of Transportation and
86


Highways (“Minister”) before the RFP was issued.
It is worth pausing here to briefly look at the
Minister’s role.

[27] Pursuant to s. 23 of the Ministry of
Transportation and Highways Act, R.S.B.C. 1996,
c. 311, the legislation in force at the relevant time,
the Minister was required to invite public tenders
for road construction unless he or she determined
that another process would result in competitively
established costs for the work. The section provided
:
23 (1)
         advertisement, or if that is impracticable, by
         public notice, for the construction and repair
         of all government buildings, highways and
         public works, except for the following:

                         .
         (c) if the minister determines that an alternative
              contracting process will result in
             competitively established costs for the
             performance of the work.
     (2) The minister must cause all tenders received
         to be opened in public, at a time and place
         stated in the advertisement or notice.
     (3) The prices must be made known at the time
         the tenders are opened.
     (4) In all cases where the minister believes it is
         not expedient to let the work to the lowest
         bidder, the minister must report to and obtain
         the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in
         Council before passing by the lowest tender,
         except if delay would be injurious to the public
         interest.

                         .

[28] These provisions make clear that the work in
this case had to be awarded by public tender, absent
the Minister’s approval of an alternative process,
and had to be awarded to the lowest bidder, absent
approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council. As
noted, ministerial approval was given for an alternative
 process under s. 23(1)(c). The Minister issued
87
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


a notice that, pursuant to that section, he approved
the process set out in an attached document and had
determined it to be an alternative contracting process
 that would result in competitively established
costs for the performance of the work. The attached
document outlined in seven numbered paragraphs
the process that had been approved.

[29] The document described the background
of the public RFEI (which I have set out earlier),
noting that only those firms identified through the
EOI process would be eligible to submit proposals
for the work and that they would receive invitations
to do so. The Minister’s approval in fact referred
to the firms who had been short-listed from the
RFEI process as being eligible. If this were taken
to refer only to the three proponents identified by
the evaluation process of the RFEI, Tercon would
be included but Brentwood would not. However,
no one has suggested that anything turns on this
and it seems clear that ultimately all six of the
RFEI proponents — including both Tercon and
Brentwood — were intended to be eligible. The
ministerial approval then briefly set out the process
. Proposals “by short-listed firms” were to be
evaluated “using the considerations set out in the
RFP”.

[30] It is clear, therefore, that participation in the
RFP process approved by the Minister was limited
to those who had participated in the RFEI process.

[31] The Province’s factum implies that the
Minister approved inclusion of the exclusion clause
in the RFP. However, there is no evidence of this
in the record before the Court. The Minister’s
approval is before us. It is dated as having been prepared
 on August 23, 2000 and signed on October
19, 2000, and approves a process outlined in a
two-page document attached to it. It says nothing
 about exclusion of the Province’s liability.
The RFP, containing the exclusion clause in issue
here, is dated January 15, 2001 and was sent out
to eligible bidders under cover of a letter of the
88


same date, some three months after the Minister’s
approval.

[32] The RFP is a lengthy document, containing
detailed instructions to proponents, required forms,
a time schedule of the work, detailed provisions
concerning contract pricing, a draft of the ultimate
 construction contract and many other things.
Most relevant for our purposes are the terms of the
instructions to proponents and in particular the eligibility
 requirements for bidders.

[33] The RFP reiterates in unequivocal terms
that eligibility to bid was restricted as set out in
the ministerial approval. It also underlines the sig-
nificance of the identity of the proponent. In s. 1.1,
the RFP specifies that only the six teams involved
in the RFEI would be eligible. The term “proponent
”, which refers to a bidder, is defined in s. 8 as
“a team that has become eligible to respond to the
RFP as described in Section 1.1 of the Instructions
to Proponents”. Section 2.8(a) of the RFP stipulates
 that only the six proponents qualified through
the RFEI process were eligible and that proposals
received from any other party would not be considered
. In short, there were potentially only six participants
 and “Contract A” could not arise by the
submission of a bid from any other party.

[34] The RFP also addressed material changes
to the proponent, including changes in the proponent
’s team members and its financial ability to
undertake and complete the work. Section 2.8(b) of
the RFP provided in part as follows:
If in the opinion of the Ministry a material change
has occurred to the Proponent since its qualification
under the RFEI, including if the composition of the
Proponent’s team members has changed . . . or if, for
financial or other reasons, the Proponent’s ability to
undertake and complete the Work has changed, then the
89
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


Ministry may request the Proponent to submit further
supporting information as the Ministry may request in
support of the Proponent’s qualification to perform the
Work. If in the sole discretion of the Ministry as a result
of the changes the Proponent is not sufficiently qualified
 to perform the Work then the Ministry reserves
the right to disqualify that Proponent, and reject its
Proposal.

[35] The proponent was to provide an organization
 chart outlining the proponent’s team members
, structure and roles. If the team members were
different from the RFEI process submission, an
explanation was to be provided for the changes:
s. 4.2(b)i). A list of subcontractors and suppliers
was also to be provided and the Ministry had to be
notified of any changes: s. 4.2(e).

[36] The RFP provided proponents with a mech-
anism to determine whether they remained qualified
 to submit a proposal. If a proponent was concerned
 about its eligibility as a result of a material
change, it could make a preliminary submission to
the Ministry describing the nature of the changes
and the Ministry would give a written decision
as to whether the proponent was still qualified:
s. 2.8(b).

[37] Brentwood tried to take advantage of this
process. The trial judge thoroughly outlined this,
at paras. 17-23 of her reasons. In brief, Brentwood
lacked expertise in drilling and blasting and by the
time the RFP was issued, it faced limited local bond-
ing capacity due to commitments to other projects,
a shorter construction period, the potential unavailability
 of subcontractors and limited equipment to
perform the work. It in fact considered not bidding
at all. Instead, however, it entered into a pre-bidding
agreement with EAC that the work would be undertaken
 by a joint venture of Brentwood and EAC
and that upon being awarded the work, they would
enter into a joint venture agreement and would
share 50/50 the costs, expenses, losses and gains.
The trial judge noted that it was common in the
industry for contractors to agree to a joint venture
on the basis of a pre-bid agreement with the specif-
ics of the joint venture to be worked out once the
contract was awarded and that Brentwood and EAC
90


acted consistently throughout in accordance with
this industry standard.

[38] Brentwood sent the Province’s project manager
, Mr. Tasaka, a preliminary submission as provided
 for in s. 2.8(b) of the RFP, advising of a material
 change in its team’s structure in that it wished
to form a joint venture with EAC. This was done,
the trial judge found, because Brentwood thought it
would be disqualified if it submitted a proposal as a
joint venture without the Ministry’s prior approval
under this section of the RFP. The Province never
responded in writing as it ought to have according
to s. 2.8(b).

[39] It seems to have been assumed by everyone
that a joint venture of Brentwood and EAC was not
eligible because this change would not simply be a
change in the composition of the bidder’s team, but
in effect a new bidder. Without reviewing in detail
all of the evidence referred to by the trial judge, it is
fair to say that although Brentwood ultimately submitted
 a proposal in its own name, the proposal in
substance was from the Brentwood/EAC joint venture
 and was evaluated as such. As the trial judge
concluded:

The substance of the proposal was as a joint venture
and this must have been apparent to all. The [project
evaluation panel] approved Brentwood/EAC as joint
venturers as the preferred proponent. The [panel] was
satisfied that Tercon had the capacity and commitment
to do the job but preferred the joint venture submission
of Brentwood/EAC. [para. 53]

[40] There was some suggestion by the Province
during oral argument that the trial judge had wrongly
imposed on it a duty to investigate Brentwood’s
bid, a duty rejected by the majority of the Court
in Double N Earthmovers Ltd. v. Edmonton (City),
2007 SCC 3, [2007] 1 S.C.R. 116. In my view, the
trial judge did no such thing. As her detailed findings
 make clear, the Province: (1) fully understood
that the Brentwood bid was in fact on behalf of a
joint venture of Brentwood and EAC; (2) thought
91
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


that a bid from that joint venture was not eligible;
and (3) took active steps to obscure the reality of
the situation. No investigation was required for
the Province to know these things and the judge
imposed no duty to engage in one.

    5. The Province’s Submissions

[41] I will address the Province’s first two points
together:

(i) a joint venture is not a legal person and therefore
     the Province could not and did not contract
    with a joint venture; and

(ii) it did not award the contract to EAC and EAC
     had no contractual responsibility to the Province
      for failure to perform the contract.

[42] I cannot accept these submissions. The issue
is not, as these arguments assume, whether the
Province contracted with a joint venture or whether
EAC had contractual obligations to the Province.
The issue is whether the Province considered an
ineligible bid; the point of substance is whether the
bid was from an eligible bidder.

[43] At trial there was no contest that a bid from
a joint venture involving an ineligible bidder would
be ineligible. The Province’s position was that there
was no need to look beyond the face of the bid to
determine who was bidding: the proposal was in
the name of Brentwood and therefore the bid was
from a compliant bidder. Respectfully, I see no
error in the trial judge’s rejection of this position.
There was a mountain of evidence to support the
judge’s conclusions that first, Brentwood’s bid, in
fact if not in form, was on behalf of a joint venture
 between itself and EAC; second, the Province
knew this and took the position that it could not
consider a bid from or award the work to that joint
venture; third, the existence of the joint venture was
a material consideration in favour of the Brentwood
bid during the evaluation process; and finally, that
steps were taken by revising and drafting documentation
 to obfuscate the reality of the situation.
92


[44] Brentwood was one of the original RFEI
proponents and was of course eligible to bid, subject
 to material changes in the composition of its
team. EAC had not submitted a proposal during the
RFEI process. It had been involved in advising the
Ministry in relation to the project in 1998 and, in
the fall of 2000, the Ministry had asked EAC to
prepare an internal bid for comparison purposes
(although EAC did not do so) as EAC was not entitled
 to bid on the Project.

[45] As noted earlier, after the RFP was issued,
Brentwood and EAC entered into a pre-bidding
agreement that provided that the work would be
undertaken in the name of Brentwood/Anderson,
a joint venture, that the work would be sponsored
and managed by the joint venture and that upon
being awarded the contract, the parties would
enter into a joint venture agreement. Brentwood
advised the Ministry in writing that it was forming
a joint venture with EAC “to submit a more competitive
 price”; this fax was in effect a preliminary
submission contemplated by s. 2.8(b) of the RFP
and was written, as the trial judge found, because
Brentwood assumed that it could be disqualified
if it submitted a proposal as a joint venture unless
prior arrangements had been made. The Province
never responded in writing to this preliminary
submission, as required by s. 2.8(b). There were,
however, discussions with the Province’s project
manager, Mr. Tasaka who, the trial judge found,
understood that a joint venture from Brentwood and
EAC would not be eligible. As the judge put it, the
Province’s position appears to have been that the
Brentwood/EAC proposal could proceed as long as
the submission was in the name of Brentwood.

[46] In the result, EAC was listed in the ultimate
submission as a “major member” of the team. The
legal relationship with EAC was not specified and
EAC was listed as a subcontractor even though,
as the trial judge found, their relationship bore no
resemblance to a standard subcontractor agreement
. The trial judge found as facts — and these
findings are not challenged — that Brentwood and
EAC always intended between themselves to form
a joint venture and to formalize that arrangement
once the contract was secured, and further, that the
93
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


role of EAC was purposefully obfuscated in the bid
to avoid an apparent conflict with s. 2.8(a) of the
RFP.

[47] During the selection process, it became clear
that the bid was in reality on behalf of a joint venture
. The project evaluation panel (“PEP”) requested
better information than provided in the bid about
the structure of the business arrangements between
Brentwood and EAC. Brentwood responded by
disclosing the pre-bid agreement between them to
form a 50/50 joint venture if successful. The PEP
understood from this that Brentwood and EAC
had a similar interest in the risk and reward under
the contract and that this helped satisfy them that
the “risk/reward” aspect of the alliance contract
could be negotiated with them flexibly. The PEP
clearly did not consider EAC to be a subcontractor
 although shown as such in the bid. In its step
6 report, the PEP consistently referred to the proponent
 as being a joint venture of Brentwood and
EAC or as “Brentwood/EAC” and the trial judge
found that it was on the basis that they were indeed
a joint venture that PEP approved Brentwood/EAC
as the preferred proponent. This step 6 report was
ultimately revised to refer only to the Brentwood
team as the official proponent. The trial judge
found as a fact that this revision was made because
“it was apparent that a joint venture was not eligible
to submit a proposal” (para. 56).

[48] The findings of the trial judge and the record
make it clear that it was no mere question of form
rather than a matter of substance whether the bidder
was Brentwood with other team members or, as it
in fact was, the Brentwood/EAC joint venture. As
she noted, at para. 121 of her reasons, the whole
purpose of the joint venture was to allow submission
 of a more competitive price than it would
have been able to do as a proponent with a team as
allowed under s. 2.8(b) of the RFP. The joint venture
 permitted a 50/50 sharing of risk and reward
and co-management of the project while at the
same time avoiding the restrictions on subcontract-
ing in the tendering documents. As the judge put it,
the bid by the joint venture constituted “material
non-compliance” with the tendering contract: “. . .
94


the joint venture with EAC allowed Brentwood to
put forward a more competitive price than contemplated
 under the RFEI proposal. This went to the
essence of the tendering process” (para. 126).

[49] The Province suggests that the trial judge’s
reasons allow form to triumph over substance. In
my view, it is the Province’s position that better
deserves that description. It had a bid which it
knew to be on behalf of a joint venture, encouraged
 the bid to proceed and took steps to obfuscate
the reality that it was on behalf of a joint venture.
Permitting the bid to proceed in this way gave the
joint venture a competitive advantage in the bidding
 process, and the record could not be clearer
that the joint venture nature of the bid was one of
its attractions during the selection process. The
Province nonetheless submits that so long as only
the name of Brentwood appears on the bid and ultimate
 Contract B, all is well. If ever a submission
advocated placing form above substance, this is it.

[50] It is true that the Province had legal advice
and did not proceed in defiance of it. However, the
facts as found by the trial judge about this legal
advice hardly advance the Province’s position. The
judge found that the Province’s lawyer was not
aware of the background relevant to the question
of whether the Brentwood bid was eligible, never
reviewed the proponent eligibility requirements in
the RFP and was not asked to and did not direct
his mind to the question of eligibility. As the trial
judge put it, the lawyer “appears to have operated
on the assumption that Brentwood had been irre-
versibly selected” (para. 70).

[51] The Brentwood/EAC joint venture having
been selected as the preferred proponent, negotiations
 for the alliance contract ensued. The trial judge
found that by this time, all agreed that a joint venture
95
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


was not an eligible proponent and the Ministry was
taking the position that the contract could not be
in the name of the joint venture. Brentwood and
EAC executed a revised pre-contract agreement
that provided, notwithstanding the letter of intent
from the Ministry addressed to Brentwood indicat-
ing that the legal relationship between them would
be contractor/subcontractor, the contract would be
performed and the profits shared equally between
them. The work was to be managed by a commit-
tee with equal representation, the bond required by
the owner was to be provided by both parties and
EAC indemnified Brentwood against half of any
loss or cost incurred as a result of performance of
the work. According to schedule B4 of the RFP, all
subcontracts were to be attached to the RFP but
no contract between Brentwood and EAC was ever
provided or attached to the proposal.

[52] The Province has identified no palpable and
overriding error in these many findings of fact by
the trial judge. I conclude, therefore, that we must
approach the case on the basis of the judge’s finding
 that the bid was in fact, if not in form, submitted
 by a joint venture of Brentwood and EAC,
that the Ministry was well aware of this, that the
existence of the joint venture was a material consideration
 in favour of the bid during the evaluation
 process and that by bidding as a joint venture,
Brentwood was given a competitive advantage in
the bidding process.

[53] I reject the Ministry’s submissions that all
that matters is the form and not the substance of
the arrangement. In my view, the trial judge’s finding
 that this bid was in fact on behalf of a joint venture
 is unassailable.

[54]

(iii) there was no term of the RFP that restricted
      the right of proponents to enter into joint
      venture agreements with others; this arrangement
       merely left Brentwood, the original
96


     proponent in place and allowed it to enhance
     its ability to perform the work.
[55] This submission addresses the question of
whether the joint venture was an eligible bidder.
The Province submits that it is, arguing that s.
2.8(b) of the RFP shows that the RFP contemplated
that each proponent would be supported by a team,
that the composition of the team might change and
that the Province under that section retained the
right to approve or reject changes in the team of
any proponent. I cannot accept these submissions.
[56] Section 2.8 must be read as a whole and
in light of the ministerial approval which I have
described earlier. Section 2.8(a), consistent with
that approval, stipulates that only the six proponents
 qualified through the RFEI process were eligible
 to submit responses and that proposals from
any other party “shall not be considered”. The word
“proponent” is defined in s. 8 as a team that has
become eligible to respond to the RFP. The material
 change provisions in s. 2.8(b) should not be read
as negating the express provisions of the RFP and
the ministerial approval of the process. When read
as a whole, the provisions about material change do
not permit the addition of a new entity as occurred
here. The process actually followed was not the
one specified in the bidding contract and was not
authorized by the statute because it was not the one
approved by the Minister.
[57] Moreover, even if one were to conclude (and
I would not) that this change from the Brentwood
team that participated in the RFEI to the Brentwood/
EAC joint venture by whom the bid was submitted
could fall within the material change provisions of
s. 2.8(b), the Province never gave a written decision
to permit this change as required by that provision.
As the trial judge noted, in fact the Province’s position
 was that such a bid would not be eligible and
its agents took steps to obfuscate the true proponent
 in the relevant documentation.
[58] The trial judge also found that there was an
implied obligation of good faith in the contract and
97
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


that the Province breached this obligation by failing
to treat all bidders equally by changing the terms of
eligibility to Brentwood’s competitive advantage.
This conclusion strongly reinforces the trial judge’s
decision about eligibility. Rather than repeating her
detailed findings, I will simply quote her summary
at para. 138:
    The whole of [the Province’s] conduct leaves me
with no doubt that the [Province] breached the duty of
fairness to [Tercon] by changing the terms of eligibility
 to Brentwood’s competitive advantage. At best, [the
Province] ignored significant information to its [i.e.
Tercon’s] detriment. At worst, the [Province] covered
up its knowledge that the successful proponent was an
ineligible joint venture. In the circumstances here, it is
not open to the [Province] to say that a joint venture
was only proposed. Nor can the [Province] say that it
was unaware of the joint venture when it acted delib-
erately to structure contract B to include EAC as fully
responsible within a separate contract with Brentwood,
so minimizing the [Province’s] risk that the contract
would be unenforceable against EAC if arrangements
did not work out. . . . The [Province] was . . . prepared
to take the risk that unsuccessful bidders would sue:
this risk did materialize.

[59] To conclude on this point, I find no fault with
the trial judge’s conclusion that the bid was in fact
submitted on behalf of a joint venture of Brentwood
and EAC which was an ineligible bidder under the
terms of the RFP. This breached not only the express
eligibility provisions of the tender documents, but
also the implied duty to act fairly towards all bidders
.

B. The Exclusion Clause
     1.

[60] As noted, the RFP includes an exclusion
clause which reads as follows:
2.10 . . .
   Except as expressly and specifically permitted in
   these Instructions to Proponents, no Proponent shall
98


     have any claim for compensation of any kind whatsoever
     , as a result of participating in this RFP, and
     by submitting a Proposal each Proponent shall be
     deemed to have agreed that it has no claim. [Emphasis
      added.]

[61] The trial judge held that as a matter of construction
, the clause did not bar recovery for the
breaches she had found. The clause, in her view,
was ambiguous and, applying the contra proferentem
 principle, she resolved the ambiguity in
Tercon’s favour. She also found that the Province’s
breach was fundamental and that it was not fair
or reasonable to enforce the exclusion clause in
light of the nature of the Province’s breach. The
Province contends that the judge erred both with
respect to the construction of the clause and
her application of the doctrine of fundamental
breach.

[62] On the issue of fundamental breach in relation
 to exclusion clauses, my view is that the time
has come to lay this doctrine to rest, as Dickson
C.J. was inclined to do more than 20 years ago:
Hunter Engineering Co. v. Syncrude Canada Ltd.,
[1989] 1 S.C.R. 426, at p. 462. I agree with the
analytical approach that should be followed when
tackling an issue relating to the applicability of an
exclusion clause set out by my colleague Binnie
J. However, I respectfully do not agree with him
on the question of the proper interpretation of the
clause in issue here. In my view, the clause does not
exclude Tercon’s claim for damages, and even if I
am wrong about that, the clause is at best ambiguous
 and should be construed contra proferentem as
the trial judge held. As a result of my conclusion on
the interpretation issue, I do not have to go on to
apply the rest of the analytical framework set out
by Binnie J.

[63] In my view, the exclusion clause does not
cover the Province’s breaches in this case. The RFP
process put in place by the Province was premised
 on a closed list of bidders; a contest with an
ineligible bidder was not part of the RFP process
and was in fact expressly precluded by its terms.
A “Contract A” could not arise as a result of submission
 of a bid from any other party. However, as
99
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


a result of how the Province proceeded, the very
premise of its own RFP process was missing, and
the work was awarded to a party who could not
be a participant in the RFP process. That is what
Tercon is complaining about. Tercon’s claim is not
barred by the exclusion clause because the clause
only applies to claims arising “as a result of participating
 in [the] RFP”, not to claims resulting
from the participation of other, ineligible parties.
Moreover, the words of this exclusion clause, in my
view, are not effective to limit liability for breach
of the Province’s implied duty of fairness to bidders
. I will explain my conclusion by turning first
to a brief account of the key legal principles and
then to the facts of the case.

    2. Legal Principles

[64] The key principle of contractual interpretation
 here is that the words of one provision must
not be read in isolation but should be considered in
harmony with the rest of the contract and in light of
its purposes and commercial context. The approach
adopted by the Court in M.J.B. is instructive. The
Court had to interpret a privilege clause, which is
somewhat analogous to the exclusion clause in issue
here. The privilege clause provided that the lowest
or any tender would not necessarily be accepted,
and the issue was whether this barred a claim based
on breach of an implied term that the owner would
accept only compliant bids. In interpreting the privilege
 clause, the Court looked at its text in light of
the contract as a whole, its purposes and commercial
 context. As Iacobucci J. said, at para. 44, “the
privilege clause is only one term of Contract A and
must be read in harmony with the rest of the tender
documents. To do otherwise would undermine the
rest of the agreement between the parties.”

[65] In a similar way, it is necessary in the present
case to consider the exclusion clause in the RFP
in light of its purposes and commercial context as
well as of its overall terms. The question is whether
the exclusion of compensation for claims resulting
100


from “participating in this RFP”, properly interpreted
, excludes liability for the Province having
unfairly considered a bid from a bidder who was
not supposed to have been participating in the RFP
process at all.
      3. Application to This Case
[66] Having regard to both the text of the clause
in its broader context and to the purposes and commercial
 context of the RFP, my view is that this
claim does not fall within the terms of the exclusion
 clause.

[67] To begin, it is helpful to recall that in interpreting
 tendering contracts, the Court has been
careful to consider the special commercial context
 of tendering. Effective tendering ultimately
depends on the integrity and business efficacy of
the tendering process: see, e.g., Martel, at para. 88;
M.J.B., at para. 41; Double N Earthmovers, at para.
106. As Iacobucci and Major JJ. put it in Martel, at
para. 116, “it is imperative that all bidders be treated
on an equal footing . . . . Parties should at the very
least be confident that their initial bids will not be
skewed by some underlying advantage in the drafting
 of the call for tenders conferred upon only one
potential bidder.”
[68] This factor is particularly weighty in the
context of public procurement. In that context, in
addition to the interests of the parties, there is the
need for transparency for the public at large. This
consideration is underlined by the statutory provisions
 which governed the tendering process in this
case. Their purpose was to assure transparency and
fairness in public tenders. As was said by Orsborn
J. (as he then was) in Cahill (G.J.) & Co. (1979)
Ltd. v. Newfoundland and Labrador (Minister of
Municipal and Provincial Affairs), 2005 NLTD
129, 250 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 145, at para. 35:
   The owner — in this case the government — is in
control of the tendering process and may define the
101
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


parameters for a compliant bid and a compliant bidder.
The corollary to this, of course, is that once the owner —
here the government — sets the rules, it must itself play
by those rules in assessing the bids and awarding the
main contract.
[69] One aspect that is generally seen as contrib-
uting to the integrity and business efficacy of the
tendering process is the requirement that only compliant
 bids be considered. As noted earlier, such a
requirement has often been implied because, as the
Court said in M.J.B., it makes little sense to think
that a bidder would comply with the bidding process
 if the owner could circumscribe it by accepting
a non-compliant bid. Respectfully, it seems to me
to make even less sense to think that eligible bidders
 would participate in the RFP if the Province
could avoid liability for ignoring an express term
concerning eligibility to bid on which the entire
RFP was premised and which was mandated by the
statutorily approved process.

[70] The closed list of bidders was the foundation
 of this RFP and there were important competitive
 advantages to a bidder who could side-step
that limitation. Thus, it seems to me that both the
integrity and the business efficacy of the tendering
process support an interpretation that would allow
the exclusion clause to operate compatibly with the
eligibility limitations that were at the very root of
the RFP.

[71] The same may be said with respect to the
implied duty of fairness. As Iacobucci and Major
JJ. wrote for the Court in Martel, at para. 88,
“[i]mplying an obligation to treat all bidders fairly
and equally is consistent with the goal of protecting
 and promoting the integrity of the bidding process
.” It seems to me that clear language is necessary
 to exclude liability for breach of such a basic
requirement of the tendering process, particularly
in the case of public procurement.
102


[72] The proper interpretation of the exclusion
clause should also take account of the statutory
context which I have reviewed earlier. The restric-
tion on eligibility of bidders was a key element of
the alternative process approved by the Minister. It
seems unlikely, therefore, that the parties intended
through this exclusion clause to effectively gut a
key aspect of the approved process. Of course, it is
true that the exclusion clause does not bar all remedies
, but only claims for compensation. However,
the fact remains that as a practical matter, there are
unlikely to be other, effective remedies for considering
 and accepting an ineligible bid and that
barring compensation for a breach of that nature
in practical terms renders the ministerial approval
process virtually meaningless. Whatever administrative
 law remedies may be available, they are
not likely to be effective remedies for awarding a
contract to an ineligible bidder. The Province did
not submit that injunctive relief would have been an
option, and I can, in any event, foresee many practical
 problems that need not detain us here in seeking
 such relief in these circumstances.

[73] The Province stresses Tercon’s commercial
 sophistication, in effect arguing that it agreed
to the exclusion clause and must accept the consequences
. This line of argument, however, has
two weaknesses. It assumes the answer to the real
question before us which is: what does the exclusion
 clause mean? The consequences of agreeing
to the exclusion clause depend on its construction.
In addition, the Province’s submission overlooks
its own commercial sophistication and the fact that
sophisticated parties can draft very clear exclusion
and limitation clauses when they are minded to
do so. Such clauses contrast starkly with the curi-
ous clause which the Province inserted into this
RFP. The limitation of liability clause in Hunter,
for example, provided that “[n]otwithstanding any
other provision in this contract or any applicable
 statutory provisions neither the Seller nor the
Buyer shall be liable to the other for special or con-
sequential damages or damages for loss of use arising
 directly or indirectly from any breach of this
contract, fundamental or otherwise” (p. 450). The
Court found this to be clear and unambiguous. The
limitation clause in issue in Guarantee Co. of North
103
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


America v. Gordon Capital Corp., [1999] 3 S.C.R.
423, provided that legal proceedings for the recovery
 of “any loss hereunder shall not be brought . . .
after the expiration of 24 months from the discovery
 of such loss” (para. 5). Once again, the Court
found this language clear. The Ontario Court of
Appeal similarly found the language of a limitation
of liability clause to be clear in Fraser Jewellers
(1982) Ltd. v. Dominion Electric Protection Co.
(1997), 34 O.R. (3d) 1. The clause provided in part
that if the defendant “should be found liable for
loss, damage or injury due to a failure of service
or equipment in any respect, its liability shall be
limited to a sum equal to 100% of the annual service
 charge or $10,000.00, whichever is less, as the
agreed upon damages and not as a penalty, as the
exclusive remedy” (p. 4). These, and many other
cases which might be referred to, demonstrate that
sophisticated parties are capable of drafting clear
and comprehensive limitation and exclusion provisions
.

[74] I turn to the text of the clause which the
Province inserted in its RFP. It addresses claims
that result from “participating in this RFP”. As
noted, the limitation on who could participate in
this RFP was one of its premises. These words
must, therefore, be read in light of the limit on who
was eligible to participate in this RFP. As noted
earlier, both the ministerial approval and the text
of the RFP itself were unequivocal: only the six
proponents qualified through the earlier RFEI process
 were eligible and proposals received from any
other party would not be considered. Thus, central
 to “participating in this RFP” was participating
in a contest among those eligible to participate. A
process involving other bidders, as the trial judge
found the process followed by the Province to be, is
not the process called for by “this RFP” and being
part of that other process is not in any meaningful
sense “participating in this RFP”.
104


[75] The Province would have us interpret the
phrase excluding compensation “as a result of participating
 in this RFP” to mean that compensation is
excluded that results from “submitting a Proposal”.
However, that interpretation is not consistent with
the wording of the clause as a whole. The clause
concludes with the phrase that “by submitting a
Proposal each Proponent shall be deemed to have
agreed that it has no claim”. If the phrases “participating
 in this RFP” and “submitting a Proposal”
were intended to mean the same thing, it is hard to
understand why different words were used in the
same short clause to express the same idea. The
fact that the Minister had approved a closed list of
participants strengthens the usual inference that
the use of different words was deliberate so as not
to exclude compensation for a departure from that
basic eligibility requirement.

[76] This interpretation of the exclusion clause
does not rob it of meaning, but makes it compatible
with other provisions of the RFP. There is a parallel
between this case and the Court’s decision in M.J.B.
There, the Court found that there was compatibility
between the privilege clause and the implied term
to accept only compliant bids. Similarly, in this
case, there is compatibility between the eligibility
requirements of the RFP and the exclusion clause.
Not any and every claim based on any and every
deviation from the RFP provisions would escape
the preclusive effect of the exclusion clause. It is
only when the defect in the Province’s adherence to
the RFP process is such that it is completely outside
that process that the exclusion clause cannot have
been intended to operate. What is important here,
in my view, is that the RFP in its conception, in its
express provisions and in the statutorily required
approval it was given, was premised on limiting
eligibility to the six proponents in the RFEI process
. Competition among others was not at all contemplated
 and was not part of the RFP process; in
fact, the RFP expressly excluded that possibility. In
short, limiting eligibility of bidders to those who
had responded to the RFEI was the foundation of
the whole RFP. As the judge found, acceptance of
105
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


a bid from an ineligible bidder “attacks the underlying
 premise of the process” established by the
RFP: para. 146. Liability for such an attack is not
excluded by a clause limiting compensation resulting
 from participation in this RFP.

[77] This interpretation is also supported by
another provision of the RFP. Under s. 2.9, as mentioned
 earlier, the Province reserved to itself the
right to unilaterally cancel the RFP and the right
to propose a new RFP allowing additional bidders
. If the exclusion clause were broad enough to
exclude compensation for allowing ineligible bidders
 to participate, there seems to be little purpose
in this reservation of the ability to cancel the RFP
and issue a new one to a wider circle of bidders. It
is also significant that the Province did not reserve
to itself the right to accept a bid from an ineligible
bidder or to unilaterally change the rules of eligibility
. The RFP expressly did exactly the opposite.
None of this, in my opinion, supports the view that
the exclusion clause should be read as applying to
the Province’s conduct in this case.

[78] To hold otherwise seems to me to be incon-
sistent with the text of the clause read in the context
of the RFP as a whole and in light of its purposes
and commercial context. In short, I cannot accept
the contention that, by agreeing to exclude compensation
 for participating in this RFP process, the
parties could have intended to exclude a damages
claim resulting from the Province unfairly permitting
 a bidder to participate who was not eligible
to do so. I cannot conclude that the provision was
intended to gut the RFP’s eligibility requirements
as to who may participate in it, or to render meaningless
 the Minister’s statutorily required approval
of the alternative process where this was a key element
. The provision, as well, was not intended to
allow the Province to escape a damages claim for
applying different eligibility criteria, to the competitive
 disadvantage of other bidders and for taking
106


steps designed to disguise the true state of affairs. I
cannot conclude that the parties, through the words
found in this exclusion clause, intended to waive
compensation for conduct like that of the Province
in this case that strikes at the heart of the integrity
 and business efficacy of the tendering process
which it undertook.
[79] If I am wrong about my interpretation of the
clause, I would hold, as did the trial judge, that its
language is at least ambiguous. If, as the Province
contends, the phrase “participating in this RFP”
could reasonably mean “submitting a Proposal”,
that phrase could also reasonably mean “compet-
ing against the other eligible participants”. Any
ambiguity in the context of this contract requires
that the clause be interpreted against the Province
and in favour of Tercon under the principle contra
proferentem: see, e.g., Hillis Oil and Sales Ltd. v.
Wynn’s Canada, Ltd., [1986] 1 S.C.R. 57, at pp.
68-69. Following this approach, the clause would
not apply to bar Tercon’s damages claim.
V. Disposition

[80] I conclude that the judge did not err in finding
 that the Province breached the tendering contract
 or in finding that Tercon’s remedy in damages
for that breach was not precluded by the exclusion
clause in the contract. I would therefore allow the
appeal, set aside the order of the Court of Appeal
and restore the judgment of the trial judge. The
parties advise that the question of costs has been
resolved between them and that therefore no order
in relation to costs is required.
  The reasons of McLachlin C.J. and Binnie,
Abella and Rothstein JJ. were delivered by
[81] BINNIE J. (dissenting) — The important legal
issue raised by this appeal is whether, and in what
107
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


circumstances, a court will deny a defendant contract
 breaker the benefit of an exclusion of liability
clause to which the innocent party, not being under
any sort of disability, has agreed. Traditionally,
this has involved consideration of what is known
as the doctrine of fundamental breach, a doctrine
which Dickson C.J. in Hunter Engineering Co. v.
Syncrude Canada Ltd., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 426, suggested
 should be laid to rest 21 years ago (p. 462).

[82] On this occasion we should again attempt to
shut the coffin on the jargon associated with “fundamental
 breach”. Categorizing a contract breach
as “fundamental” or “immense” or “colossal” is
not particularly helpful. Rather, the principle is
that a court has no discretion to refuse to enforce
a valid and applicable contractual exclusion clause
unless the plaintiff (here the appellant Tercon) can
point to some paramount consideration of public
policy sufficient to override the public interest in
freedom of contact and defeat what would otherwise
 be the contractual rights of the parties. Tercon
points to the public interest in the transparency
and integrity of the government tendering process
(in this case, for a highway construction contract)
but in my view such a concern, while important,
did not render unenforceable the terms of the contract
 Tercon agreed to. There is nothing inherently
unreasonable about exclusion clauses. Tercon is
a large and sophisticated corporation. Unlike my
colleague Justice Cromwell, I would hold that the
respondent Ministry’s conduct, while in breach of
its contractual obligations, fell within the terms of
the exclusion clause. In turn, there is no reason why
the clause should not be enforced. I would dismiss
the appeal.

I.

[83] This appeal concerns a contract to build a $35
million road in the remote Nass Valley of British
Columbia (the “Kincolith project”). The respondent
 Ministry accepted a bid from Brentwood
108


Enterprises Ltd. that did not comply with the terms
of tender. Tercon, as the disappointed finalist in the
bidding battle, seeks compensation equivalent to
the profit it expected to earn had it been awarded
the contract.

[84] Tercon alleged, and the trial judge found,
that although the winning bid was submitted in the
name of Brentwood (an eligible bidder), Brentwood
in fact intended, with the Ministry’s knowledge and
encouragement, to do the work in a co-venture with
an ineligible bidder, Emil Anderson Construction
Co. (“EAC”). The respondent Ministry raised
a number of defences including the fact that
the formal contract was signed in the name of
Brentwood alone. This defence was rejected in the
courts below. The Ministry’s substantial defence
in this Court is that even if it failed to abide by
the bidding rules, it is nonetheless protected by an
exclusion of compensation clause set out clearly in
the request for proposals (“RFP”). The clause provided
 that “no Proponent shall have any claim for
compensation of any kind whatsoever, as a result of
participating in this RFP” and that “by submitting
a Proposal each Proponent shall be deemed to have
agreed that it has no claim” (s. 2.10 of the RFP).

[85] The appeal thus brings into conflict the
public policy that favours a fair, open and transparent
 bid process, and the freedom of contract of
sophisticated and experienced parties in a commercial
 environment to craft their own contractual
relations. I agree with Tercon that the public interest
 favours an orderly and fair scheme for tendering
 in the construction industry, but there is also
a public interest in leaving knowledgeable parties
free to order their own commercial affairs. In my
view, on the facts of this case, the Court should not
rewrite — nor should the Court refuse to give effect
to — the terms agreed to by the parties.

[86] I accept, as did the courts below, that the
respondent Ministry breached the terms of its own
RFP when it contracted with Brentwood, know-
ing the work would be carried out by a co-venture
with Brentwood and EAC. The addition of EAC, a
109
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


bigger contractor with greater financial resources
than Brentwood, created a stronger competitor
for Tercon than Brentwood alone. However, I also
agree with the B.C. Court of Appeal that the exclusion
 of compensation clause is clear and unambiguous
 and that no legal ground or rule of law permits
us to override the freedom of the parties to contract
(or to decline to contract) with respect to this particular
 term, or to relieve Tercon against its operation
 in this case.

II. The Tendering Process

[87] For almost three decades, the law governing
a structured bidding process has been dominated
by the concept of Contract A/Contract B initially
formulated in The Queen in right of Ontario v. Ron
Engineering & Construction (Eastern) Ltd., [1981]
1 S.C.R. 111. The analysis advanced by Estey J. in
that case was that the bidding process, as defined
by the terms of the tender call, may create contractual
 relations (“Contract A”) prior in time and quite
independently of the contract that is the actual
subject matter of the bid (“Contract B”). Breach
of Contract A may, depending on its terms, give
rise to contractual remedies for non-performance
even if Contract B is never entered into or, as in
the present case, it is awarded to a competitor. The
result of this legal construct is to provide unsuccessful
 bidders with a contractual remedy against
an owner who departs from its own bidding rules.
Contract A, however, arises (if at all) as a matter of
interpretation. It is not imposed as a rule of law.

[88] In Ron Engineering, the result of Estey J.’s
analysis was that as a matter of contractual interpretation
, the Ontario government was allowed
to retain a $150,000 bid bond put up by Ron
Engineering even though the government was told,
a little over an hour after the bids were opened, that
Ron Engineering had made a $750,058 error in the
calculation of its bid and wished to withdraw it.
Estey J. held:

The contractor was not asked to sign a contract which
diverged in any way from its tender but simply to sign a
110


contract in accordance with the instructions to tender-
ers and in conformity with its own tender. [p. 127]

In other words, harsh as it may have seemed to Ron
Engineering, the parties were held to their bargain.
The Court was not prepared to substitute “fair and
reasonable” terms for what the parties had actually
agreed to.
[89] In M.J.B. Enterprises Ltd. v. Defence
Construction (1951) Ltd., [1999] 1 S.C.R. 619,
Contract A included a “privilege” clause which
stated that the owner was not obliged to accept the
lowest or any tender. The Court implied a term,
based on the presumed intention of the parties, that
notwithstanding the privilege clause, only compliant
 bids were open to acceptance. While the owner
was not obliged to accept the lowest compliant bid,
the privilege clause did not, as a matter of contractual
 interpretation, give the owner “the privilege”
of accepting a non-compliant bid. M.J.B. stops
short of the issue in the present appeal because in
that case, there was a breach of Contract A but no
clause purporting to exclude liability on the part
of the owner to pay compensation in the event of a
Contract A violation.
[90] In Naylor Group Inc. v. Ellis-Don
Construction Ltd., 2001 SCC 58, [2001] 2 S.C.R.
943, the Court enforced the rules of the bid
depository system against a contractor whose bid
was based on what turned out to be a mistaken
view of its collective bargaining status with the
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers.
The Court again affirmed that “[t]he existence and
content of Contract A will depend on the facts of
the particular case” (para. 36). Ellis-Don sought
relief from its bid on the basis of a labour board
decision rendered subsequent to its bid that upheld,
to its surprise, the bargaining rights of the union.
This Court held that no relief was contemplated in
the circumstances under Contract A and none was
afforded, even though this was a costly result when
viewed from the perspective of Ellis-Don.
111
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


[91] In Martel Building Ltd. v. Canada, 2000
SCC 60, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 860, citing M.J.B., the
Court implied a term in Contract A obligating the
owner to be fair and consistent in the assessment of
tender bids. On the facts, the disappointed bidder’s
claim of unfair treatment was rejected.

[92] Finally, in Double N Earthmovers Ltd. v.
Edmonton (City), 2007 SCC 3, [2007] 1 S.C.R. 116,
the unsuccessful bidder claimed that Edmonton had
accepted, in breach of Contract A, a competitor’s
non-compliant bid to provide heavy equipment of
a certain age to move refuse at a waste disposal
site. The Court refused to imply a term “requir-
ing an owner to investigate to see if bidders will
really do what they promised in their tender” (para.
50). Accepting the existence of a duty of “fairness
and equality”, the majority nevertheless held that
“[t]he best way to make sure that all bids receive
the same treatment is for an owner to weigh bids on
the basis of what is actually in the bid, not to weigh
them on the basis of subsequently discovered information
” (para. 52). In other words, the majority’s
interpretation of the express terms of Contract A
was enforced despite Double N Earthmovers’ com-
plaint of double dealing by the owner.

[93] On the whole, therefore, while Ron
Engineering and its progeny have encouraged the
establishment of a fair and transparent bidding process
, Contract A continues to be based not on some
abstract externally imposed rule of law but on the
presumed (and occasionally implied) intent of the
parties. Only in rare circumstances will the Court
relieve a party from the bargain it has made.

[94] As to implied terms, M.J.B. emphasized (at
para. 29) that the focus is “the intentions of the
actual parties”. A court, when dealing with a claim
to an implied term, “must be careful not to slide
112


into determining the intentions of reasonable parties
” (emphasis in original). Thus, “if there is evidence
 of a contrary intention, on the part of either
party, an implied term may not be found on this
basis”.

[95] Tercon is a large and experienced contractor
. As noted by Donald J.A. in the B.C. Court of
Appeal, it had earlier “successfully recovered damages
 from the [Ministry] on a bidding default in
a previous case” (2007 BCCA 592, 73 B.C.L.R.
(4th) 201, at para. 15). See Tercon Contractors
Ltd. v. British Columbia (1993), 9 C.L.R. (2d)
197 (B.C.S.C.), aff’d [1994] B.C.J. No. 2658 (QL)
(C.A.). Thus Tercon would have been more sensi-
tive than most contractors to the risks posed by an
exclusion of compensation clause. It nevertheless
chose to bid on the project on the terms proposed
by the Ministry.

III. Tercon’s Claim for Relief From the Exclusionary
      Clause It Agreed to

[96] In these circumstances, the first question is
whether there is either a statutory legal obstacle to,
or a principled legal argument against, the freedom
of these parties to contract out of the obligation
that would otherwise exist for the Ministry to pay
compensation for a breach of Contract A. If not,
the second question is whether there is any other
barrier to the court’s enforcement of the exclusionary
 clause in the circumstances that occurred. On
the first branch, Tercon relies on the Ministry of
Transportation and Highways Act, R.S.B.C. 1996,
c. 311 (“Transportation Act” or the “Act”). On the
second branch, Tercon relies on the doctrine of
fundamental breach.

A. The Statutory Argument

[97] Section 4 of the Transportation Act provides
that before awarding a highway contract, “the minister
 must invite tenders in any manner that will
make the invitation for tenders reasonably available
113
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


to the public”, but then provides for several excep-
tions: “The minister need not invite tenders for a
project . . . if . . . (c) the minister believes that an
alternative contracting process will result in a competitively
 established cost for the project”. Here the
required ministerial authorization was obtained for
an “alternative process”. The reason is as follows.
As noted by Cromwell J., the Ministry’s original
idea was to use a “design-build” model where a
single contractor would design and build the highway
 for a fixed price. The Ministry issued a request
for expressions of interest (“RFEI”) which attracted
six responses. One was from Tercon. Another was
from Brentwood. EAC declined to bid because it
did not think the “design-build” concept was appropriate
 for the job.

[98] On further reflection, the Ministry decided
not to pursue the design-build approach. It decided
to design the highway itself. The contract would be
limited to construction, as EAC had earlier advocated
. EAC was not allowed to bid despite the
Ministry coming around to its point of view on the
proper way to tender the project. The Ministry limited
 bidding on the new contest to the six respond-
ents to the original RFEI, all of whom had been
found capable of performing the contract. But to
do so, it needed, and did obtain, the Minister’s s. 4
approval.

[99] A question arose during the hearing of the
appeal as to whether the Minister actually approved
an “alternative process” that not only restricted eligibility
 to the six participants in the RFEI process
(an advantage to Tercon and the other five participants
), but also contained the “no claims” clause
excluding compensation for non-observance of its
terms (no doubt considered a disadvantage). In its
factum, the Ministry states:

In this case, the Minister approved an alternate process
under [s. 4(2) of the B.C. Transportation Act]. That process
 was set out in the Instructions to Proponents, which
included the No Claim Clause. Having been approved
by the Minister, the package (including the No Claim
114


Clause) complied with section 4 of the Transportation
Act. [para. 70]
[100] Tercon argued at the hearing of this appeal
that as a matter of law, Contract A could not have
included the exclusion clause because
    [t]he policy of the [Transportation Act] is to ensure
that the Ministry is accountable; to preserve confidence
in the integrity of the tendering process. To ensure that
is so and that the Minister is accountable, the Ministry
must be held liable for its breach of Contract A in considering
 and accepting a proposal from the joint venture
 . . . .

                        .
   MADAM JUSTICE ABELLA: Can I just ask you one
question. Is it your position, sir, that you can never
have -- that a government can never have a no claims
clause?
   MR. McLEAN: Yes. Under this statute because of the
policy of the statute. [Transcript, at p. 27]
[101] While it is true that the Act favours “the
integrity of the tendering process”, it nowhere prohibits
 the parties from negotiating a “no claims”
clause as part of their commercial agreement, and
cannot plausibly be interpreted to have that effect.

[102] In the ordinary world of commerce, as
Dickson C.J. commented in Hunter, “clauses limiting
 or excluding liability are negotiated as part
of the general contract. As they do with all other
contractual terms, the parties bargain for the consequences
 of deficient performance” (p. 461).
Moreover, as Mr. Hall points out, “[t]here are many
valid reasons for contracting parties to use exemp-
tion clauses, most notably to allocate risks” (G. R.
Hall, Canadian Contractual Interpretation Law
(2007), at p. 243). Tercon, for example, is a sophisticated
 and experienced contractor and if it decided
that it was in its commercial interest to proceed
with the bid despite the exclusion of compensation
clause, that was its prerogative and nothing in the
“policy of the Act” barred the parties’ agreement
on that point.
115
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


[103] To the extent Tercon is now saying that as a
matter of fact the Minister, in approving the RFP,
did not specifically approve the exclusion clause,
and that the contract was thus somehow ultra vires
the Ministry, this is not an issue that was either
pleaded or dealt with in the courts below. The
details of the ministerial approval process were not
developed in the evidence. It is not at all evident
that s. 4 required the Minister to approve the actual
terms of the RFP. It is an administrative law point
that Tercon, if so advised, ought to have pursued
at pre-trial discovery and in the trial evidence. We
have not been directed to any exploration of the
matter in the testimony and it is too late in the pro-
ceeding for Tercon to explore it now. Accordingly,
I proceed on the basis that the exclusion clause did
not run afoul of the statutory requirements.

B. The Doctrine of the Fundamental Breach

[104] The trial judge considered the applicability
 of the doctrine of fundamental breach. Tercon
argued that the Ministry, by reason of its fundamental
 breach, had forfeited the protection of the
exclusion of compensation clause.

[105] The leading case is Hunter which also dealt
with an exclusion of liability clause. The appellants
Hunter Engineering and Allis-Chalmers Canada
Ltd. supplied gearboxes used to drive conveyor
belts at Syncrude’s tar sands operations in Northern
Alberta. The gearboxes proved to be defective. At
issue was a broad exclusion of warranty clause
that limited time for suit and the level of recovery
available against Allis-Chalmers (i.e. no recovery
beyond the unit price of the defective products).
Dickson C.J. observed: “In the face of the contractual
 provisions, Allis-Chalmers can only be found
liable under the doctrine of fundamental breach”
(p. 451).

[106] This doctrine was largely the creation of
Lord Denning in the 1950s (see, e.g., Karsales
116


(Harrow) Ltd. v. Wallis, [1956] 1 W.L.R. 936
(C.A.)). It was said to be a rule of law that operated
 independently of the intention of the parties
 in circumstances where the defendant had so
egregiously breached the contract as to deny the
plaintiff substantially the whole of its benefit. In
such a case, according to the doctrine, the innocent
 party was excused from further performance
but the defendant could still be held liable for the
consequences of its “fundamental” breach even
if the parties had excluded liability by clear and
express language. See generally S. M. Waddams,
The Law of Contracts (5th ed. 2005), at para. 478;
J. D. McCamus, The Law of Contracts (2005), at
pp. 765 et seq.

[107] The five-judge Hunter Court was unanimous
 in the result and gave effect to the exclusion
clause at issue. Dickson C.J. and Wilson J. both
emphasized that there is nothing inherently unreasonable
 about exclusion clauses and that they should
be applied unless there is a compelling reason not
to give effect to the words selected by the parties.
At that point, there was some divergence of opinion
.

[108] Dickson C.J. (La Forest J. concurring)
observed that the doctrine of fundamental breach
had “spawned a host of difficulties” (p. 460), the
most obvious being the difficulty in determining
whether a particular breach is fundamental. The
doctrine obliged the parties to engage in “games
of characterization” (p. 460) which distracted from
the real question of what agreement the parties
themselves intended. Accordingly, in his view, the
doctrine should be “laid to rest”. The situations in
which the doctrine is invoked could be addressed
more directly and effectively through the doctrine
of “unconscionability”, as assessed at the time the
contract was made:
It is preferable to interpret the terms of the contract, in
an attempt to determine exactly what the parties agreed.
If on its true construction the contract excludes liability
for the kind of breach that occurred, the party in breach
will generally be saved from liability. Only where the
contract is unconscionable, as might arise from situations
 of unequal bargaining power between the parties,
117
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


should the courts interfere with agreements the parties
have freely concluded. [p. 462]
Dickson C.J. explained that “[t]he courts do not
blindly enforce harsh or unconscionable bargains”
(p. 462), but “there is much to be gained by address-
ing directly the protection of the weak from over-
reaching by the strong, rather than relying on the
artificial legal doctrine of ‘fundamental breach’”
(p. 462). To enforce an exclusion clause in such circumstances
 could tarnish the institutional integrity
of the court. In that respect, it would be contrary
to public policy. However, a valid exclusion clause
would be enforced according to its terms.

[109] Wilson J. (L’Heureux-Dubé J. concurring)
disagreed. In her view, the courts retain some
residual discretion to refuse to enforce exclusion
clauses in cases of fundamental breach where the
doctrine of pre-breach unconscionability (favoured
by Dickson C.J.) did not apply. Importantly, she
rejected the imposition of a general standard of
reasonableness in the judicial scrutiny of exclusion
clauses, affirming that “the courts . . . are quite
unsuited to assess the fairness or reasonableness
of contractual provisions as the parties negotiated
them” (p. 508). Wilson J. considered it more desirable
 to develop through the common law a post-
breach analysis seeking a “balance between the
obvious desirability of allowing the parties to make
their own bargains . . . and the obvious undesirabil-
ity of having the courts used to enforce bargains in
favour of parties who are totally repudiating such
bargains themselves” (p. 510).

[110] Wilson J. contemplated a two-stage test, in
which the threshold step is the identification of a
fundamental breach where “the foundation of the
contract has been undermined, where the very
thing bargained for has not been provided” (p.
500). Having found a fundamental breach to exist,
the exclusion clause would not automatically be set
118


aside, but the court should go on to assess whether,
having regard to the circumstances of the breach,
the party in fundamental breach should escape liability
:
Exclusion clauses do not automatically lose their validity
 in the event of a fundamental breach by virtue of
some hard and fast rule of law. They should be given
their natural and true construction so that the meaning
and effect of the exclusion clause the parties agreed to
at the time the contract was entered into is fully understood
 and appreciated. But, in my view, the court must
still decide, having ascertained the parties’ intention at
the time the contract was made, whether or not to give
effect to it in the context of subsequent events such as
a fundamental breach committed by the party seeking
its enforcement through the courts. . . . [T]he question
essentially is: in the circumstances that have happened
should the court lend its aid to A to hold B to this clause?
[Emphasis added; pp. 510-11.]
[111] Wilson J. reiterated that “as a general rule”
courts should give effect to exclusion clauses
even in the case of fundamental breach (p. 515).
Nevertheless, a residual discretion to withhold
enforcement exists:
Lord Wilberforce [in Photo Production Ltd. v. Securicor
Transport Ltd., [1980] A.C. 827 (H.L.)] may be right
that parties of equal bargaining power should be left to
live with their bargains regardless of subsequent events.
I believe, however, that there is some virtue in a residual
 power residing in the court to withhold its assistance
 on policy grounds in appropriate circumstances.
[Emphasis added; p. 517.]
Wilson J. made it clear that such circumstances of
disentitlement would be rare. She acknowledged
that an exclusion clause might well be accepted
with open eyes by a party “very anxious to get” the
contract (p. 509). However, Wilson J. did not elabo-
rate further on what such circumstances might be
because she found in Hunter itself that no reason
existed to refuse the defendant Allis-Chalmers the
benefit of the exclusion clause.
[112] The fifth judge, McIntyre J., in a crisp two-
paragraph judgment, agreed with the conclusion of
119
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


Wilson J. in respect of the exclusion clause issue but
found it “unnecessary to deal further with the concept
 of fundamental breach in this case” (p. 481).

[113] The law was left in this seemingly bifur-
cated state until Guarantee Co. of North America v.
Gordon Capital Corp., [1999] 3 S.C.R. 423. In that
case, the Court breathed some life into the dying
doctrine of fundamental breach while nevertheless
affirming (once again) that whether or not a “fundamental
 breach prevents the breaching party from
continuing to rely on an exclusion clause is a matter
of construction rather than a rule of law” (para. 52).
In other words, the question was whether the parties
 intended at the time of contract formation that
the exclusion or limitation clause would apply “in
circumstances of contractual breach, whether fundamental
 or otherwise” (para. 63). The Court thus
emphasized that what was important was not the
label (“fundamental or otherwise”) but the intent of
the contracting parties when they made their bargain
. “The only limitation placed upon enforcing
the contract as written in the event of a fundamental
 breach”, the Court in Guarantee Co. continued,

would be to refuse to enforce an exclusion of liability
in circumstances where to do so would be unconscionable
, according to Dickson C.J., or [note the disjunc-
tive “or”] unfair, unreasonable or otherwise contrary to
public policy, according to Wilson J. [Emphasis added;
para. 52.]

(See also para. 64.)

What has given rise to some concern is not the reference
 to “public policy”, whose role in the enforcement
 of contracts has never been doubted, but to
the more general ideas of “unfair” and “unreasonable
”, which seemingly confer on courts a very
broad after-the-fact discretion.

[114] The Court’s subsequent observations in
ABB Inc. v. Domtar Inc., 2007 SCC 50, [2007] 3
S.C.R. 461, should be seen in that light. Domtar
was a products liability case arising under the civil
120


law of Quebec, but the Court observed with respect
to the common law:
    Once the existence of a fundamental breach has
been established, the court must still analyse the limitation
 of liability clause in light of the general rules of
contract interpretation. If the words can reasonably be
interpreted in only one way, it will not be open to the
court, even on grounds of equity or reasonableness, to
declare the clause to be unenforceable since this would
amount to rewriting the contract negotiated by the parties
. [Emphasis added; para. 84.]

While the Domtar Court continued to refer to “fundamental
 breach”, it notably repudiated any judicial
discretion to depart from the terms of a valid contact
 upon vague notions of “equity or reasonableness
”. It did not, however, express any doubt about
the residual category mentioned in Guarantee Co.,
namely a refusal to enforce an exclusion clause on
the grounds of public policy.

[115] I agree with Professor Waddams when he
writes:
[I]t is surely inevitable that a court must reserve the
ultimate power to decide when the values favouring
enforceability are outweighed by values that society
holds to be more important. [para. 557]

[116] While memorably described as an unruly
horse, public policy is nevertheless fundamental
to contract law, both to contractual formation and
enforcement and (occasionally) to the court’s relief
against enforcement. As Duff C.J. observed:
It is the duty of the courts to give effect to contracts and
testamentary dispositions according to the settled rules
and principles of law, since we are under a reign of law;
but there are cases in which rules of law cannot have
their normal operation because the law itself recognizes
some paramount consideration of public policy which
over-rides the interest and what otherwise would be the
rights and powers of the individual.

(Re Millar Estate, [1938] S.C.R. 1, at p. 4)

See generally B. Kain and D. T. Yoshida, “The
Doctrine of Public Policy in Canadian Contract
121
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


Law”, in T. L. Archibald and R. S. Echlin, eds.,
Annual Review of Civil Litigation, 2007 (2007), 1.

[117] As Duff C.J. recognized, freedom of contract
 will often, but not always, trump other soci-
etal values. The residual power of a court to decline
enforcement exists but, in the interest of certainty
and stability of contractual relations, it will rarely
be exercised. Duff C.J. adopted the view that public
policy “should be invoked only in clear cases, in
which the harm to the public is substantially incontestable
, and does not depend upon the idiosyncratic
inferences of a few judicial minds” (p. 7). While he
was referring to public policy considerations per-
taining to the nature of the entire contract, I accept
that there may be well-accepted public policy considerations
 that relate directly to the nature of the
breach, and thus trigger the court’s narrow juris-
diction to give relief against an exclusion clause.

[118] There are cases where the exercise of what
Professor Waddams calls the “ultimate power” to
refuse to enforce a contract may be justified, even
in the commercial context. Freedom of contract,
like any freedom, may be abused. Take the case of
the milk supplier who adulterates its baby formula
with a toxic compound to increase its profitability
at the cost of sick or dead babies. In China, such
people were shot. In Canada, should the courts give
effect to a contractual clause excluding civil liability
 in such a situation? I do not think so. Then there
are the people, also fortunately resident elsewhere,
who recklessly sold toxic cooking oil to unsuspect-
ing consumers, creating a public health crisis of
enormous magnitude. Should the courts enforce an
exclusion clause to eliminate contractual liability
for the resulting losses in such circumstances? The
answer is no, but the contract breaker’s conduct
need not rise to the level of criminality or fraud to
justify a finding of abuse.
122


[119] A less extreme example in the commercial
context is Plas-Tex Canada Ltd. v. Dow Chemical
of Canada Ltd., 2004 ABCA 309, 245 D.L.R.
(4th) 650. The Alberta Court of Appeal refused
to enforce an exclusion clause where the defendant
 Dow knowingly supplied defective plastic resin
to a customer who used it to fabricate natural gas
pipelines. Instead of disclosing its prior knowledge
 of the defect to the buyer, Dow chose to try
to protect itself by relying upon limitation of liability
 clauses in its sales contracts. After some years,
the pipelines began to degrade, with considerable
damage to property and risk to human health from
leaks and explosions. The court concluded that “a
party to a contract will not be permitted to engage
in unconscionable conduct secure in the knowledge
that no liability can be imposed upon it because
of an exclusionary clause” (para. 53). (See also
McCamus, at p. 774, and Hall, at p. 243.) What was
demonstrated in Plas-Tex was that the defendant
Dow was so contemptuous of its contractual obligation
 and reckless as to the consequences of the
breach as to forfeit the assistance of the court. The
public policy that favours freedom of contract was
outweighed by the public policy that seeks to curb
its abuse.

[120] Conduct approaching serious criminality or
egregious fraud are but examples of well-accepted
and “substantially incontestable” considerations
of public policy that may override the counter-
vailing public policy that favours freedom of contract
. Where this type of misconduct is reflected
in the breach of contract, all of the circumstances
should be examined very carefully by the court.
Such misconduct may disable the defendant from
hiding behind the exclusion clause. But a plaintiff
who seeks to avoid the effect of an exclusion clause
must identify the overriding public policy that it
says outweighs the public interest in the enforcement
 of the contract. In the present case, for the
reasons discussed below, I do not believe Tercon
has identified a relevant public policy that fulfills
this requirement.
123
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


[121] The present state of the law, in summary,
requires a series of enquiries to be addressed when
a plaintiff seeks to escape the effect of an exclusion
clause or other contractual terms to which it had
previously agreed.
[122] The first issue, of course, is whether as a
matter of interpretation the exclusion clause even
applies to the circumstances established in evidence
. This will depend on the Court’s assessment
of the intention of the parties as expressed in the
contract. If the exclusion clause does not apply,
there is obviously no need to proceed further with
this analysis. If the exclusion clause applies, the
second issue is whether the exclusion clause was
unconscionable at the time the contract was made,
“as might arise from situations of unequal bargaining
 power between the parties” (Hunter, at p. 462).
This second issue has to do with contract formation
, not breach.
[123] If the exclusion clause is held to be valid
and applicable, the Court may undertake a third
enquiry, namely whether the Court should nevertheless
 refuse to enforce the valid exclusion clause
because of the existence of an overriding public
policy, proof of which lies on the party seeking to
avoid enforcement of the clause, that outweighs the
very strong public interest in the enforcement of
contracts.
IV. Application to the Facts of This Case
[124] I proceed to deal with the issues in the
sequence mentioned above.
A. Did the Ministry Breach Contract A?
[125] The trial judge found that the parties
intended to create contractual relations at the bidding
 stage (i.e. Contract A): 2006 BCSC 499, 53
B.C.L.R. (4th) 138, at para. 88. I agree with that conclusion
. If there were no intent to form Contract A,
there would be no need to exclude liability for compensation
 in the event of its breach.
[126] The Ministry argued that Contract A was
not breached. It was entitled to enter into Contract B
124


with Brentwood and it did so. There was no priv-
ity between the Ministry and EAC. The Ministry
would have had no direct claim against EAC in the
event of deficient performance. I accept as correct
that Brentwood, having obtained Contract B, was in
a position of considerable flexibility as to how and
with whom it carried out the work. Nevertheless,
it was open to the trial judge to conclude, as she
did, that the RFP process was not conducted by the
Ministry with the degree of fairness and transparency
 that the terms of Contract A entitled Tercon to
expect. At the end of an unfair process, she found,
Contract B was not awarded to Brentwood (the eligible
 bidder) but to what amounted to a joint venture
 consisting of Brentwood and EAC. I therefore
proceed with the rest of the analysis on the basis
that Contract A was breached.

B. What Is the Proper Interpretation of the Exclusion
    of Compensation Clause and Did the
   Ministry’s Conduct Fall Within Its Terms?

[127] It is at this stage that I part company with
my colleague Cromwell J. The exclusion clause is
contained in the RFP and provides as follows:
2.10 . . .
   Except as expressly and specifically permitted in
   these Instructions to Proponents, no Proponent shall
   have any claim for compensation of any kind whatsoever
   , as a result of participating in this RFP, and
   by submitting a Proposal each Proponent shall be
   deemed to have agreed that it has no claim.

In my view, “participating in this RFP” began with
“submitting a Proposal” for consideration. The
RFP process consisted of more than the final selection
 of the winning bid and Tercon participated in
it. Tercon’s bid was considered. To deny that such
participation occurred on the ground that in the end
the Ministry chose a Brentwood joint venture (ineligible
) instead of Brentwood itself (eligible) would,
I believe, take the Court up the dead end identified
by Wilson J. in Hunter:
. . . exclusion clauses, like all contractual provisions,
should be given their natural and true construction.
125
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


Great uncertainty and needless complications in the
drafting of contracts will obviously result if courts give
exclusion clauses strained and artificial interpretations
in order, indirectly and obliquely, to avoid the impact of
what seems to them ex post facto to have been an unfair
and unreasonable clause. [p. 509]

Professor McCamus expresses a similar thought:
. . . the law concerning exculpatory clauses is likely to
be more rather than less predictable if the underlying
concern is openly recognized, as it is in Hunter, rather
than suppressed and achieved indirectly through the
subterfuge of strained interpretation of such terms.
[p. 778]

[128] I accept the trial judge’s view that the
Ministry was at fault in its performance of the
RFP, but the conclusion that the process thereby
ceased to be the RFP process appears to me, with
due respect to colleagues of a different view, to be
a “strained and artificial interpretatio[n] in order,
indirectly and obliquely, to avoid the impact of
what seems to them ex post facto to have been an
unfair and unreasonable clause”.

[129] As a matter of interpretation, I agree with
Donald J.A. speaking for the unanimous court
below:
    The [trial] judge said the word “participating” was
ambiguous. With deference, I do not find it so. The sense
it conveys is the contractor’s involvement in the RFP/
contract A stage of the process. I fail to see how “participating
” could bear any other meaning. [Emphasis
added; para. 16.]

Accordingly, I conclude that on the face of it, the
exclusion clause applies to the facts described in
the evidence before us.

C. Was the Claim Excluding Compensation
   Unconscionable at the Time Contract A Was
   Made?

[130] At this point, the focus turns to contract
formation. Tercon advances two arguments: firstly,
that it suffered from an inequality of bargaining
 power and secondly, (as mentioned) that the
126


exclusion clause violates public policy as reflected
in the Transportation Act.

      (1) Unequal Bargaining Power

[131] In Hunter, Dickson C.J. stated, at p. 462:
“Only where the contract is unconscionable, as
might arise from situations of unequal bargaining
power between the parties, should the courts interfere
 with agreements the parties have freely concluded
.” Applying that test to the case before him,
he concluded:
I have no doubt that unconscionability is not an issue in
this case. Both Allis-Chalmers and Syncrude are large
and commercially sophisticated companies. Both parties
 knew or should have known what they were doing
and what they had bargained for when they entered into
the contract. [p. 464]

While Tercon is not on the same level of power and
authority as the Ministry, Tercon is a major contractor
 and is well able to look after itself in a commercial
 context. It need not bid if it doesn’t like
what is proposed. There was no relevant imbalance
in bargaining power.

      (2) Policy of the Transportation Act

[132] As mentioned earlier, Tercon cites and
relies upon the policy of the Act which undoubtedly
favours the transparency and integrity of the bidding
 process. I have already discussed my reasons
for rejecting Tercon’s argument that this “policy”
operates as a bar to the ability of the parties to
agree on such commonplace commercial terms
as in the circumstances they think appropriate. In
addition, the exclusion clause is not as draconian
as Tercon portrays it. Other remedies for breach
of Contract A (specific performance or injunctive
relief, for example) were available.

[133] In this case, injunction relief was in fact a
live possibility. Although Tercon was not briefed on
the negotiations with other bidders, the trial judge
found that Glenn Walsh, the owner of Tercon, “had
seen representatives of EAC with Brentwood following
 [the Brentwood/EAC interviews with the
127
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


Ministry and Bill Swain of Brentwood]”, and when
asked whether Tercon was going to sue, Walsh had
said “no” without further comment. Had Tercon
pushed for more information and sought an injunction
 (as a matter of private law, not public law), at
that stage the exclusion clause would have had no
application, but Tercon did not do so. This is not
to say that estoppel or waiver applies. Nor is it to
say that injunctive relief would be readily available
in many bidding situations (although if an injunction
 had been sought here, the unavailability of the
alternative remedy of monetary damages might
have assisted Tercon). It is merely to say that the
exclusion clause is partial, not exhaustive.

[134] The Kincolith road project presented a serious
 construction challenge on a tight time frame
and within a tight budget. Contract A did not
involve a bid for a fixed price contract but for the
right to negotiate the bid details once the winning
proponent was selected. In such a fluid situation,
all participants could expect difficulties in the contracting
 process. Members of the construction bar
are nothing if not litigious. In the circumstances,
the bidders might reasonably have accepted (however
 reluctantly) the Ministry’s need for a bidding
process that excluded compensation, and adjusted
their bids accordingly. The taxpayers of British
Columbia were not prepared to pay the contractor
’s profit twice over — once to Brentwood/EAC
for actually building the road, and now to Tercon,
even though in Tercon’s case the “profit” would be
gained without Tercon running the risks associated
with the performance of Contract B. The Court
should not be quick to declare such a clause, negotiated
 between savvy participants in the construction
 business, to be “contrary to the Act”.

D. Assuming the Validity of the Exclusion Clause
   at the Time the Contract Was Made, Is There
   Any Overriding Public Policy That Would Justify
    the Court’s Refusal to Enforce It?

[135] If the exclusion clause is not invalid from the
outset, I do not believe the Ministry’s performance
128


can be characterized as so aberrant as to forfeit the
protection of the contractual exclusion clause on the
basis of some overriding public policy. While there
is a public interest in a fair and transparent tendering
 process, it cannot be ratcheted up to defeat the
enforcement of Contract A in this case. There was
an RFP process and Tercon participated in it.

[136] Assertions of ineligible bidders and ineligible
 bids are the bread and butter of construction
litigation. If a claim to defeat the exclusion clause
succeeds here on the basis that the owner selected
a joint venture consisting of an eligible bidder with
an ineligible bidder, so also by a parity of reasoning
should an exclusion clause be set aside if the owner
accepted a bid ineligible on other grounds. There
would be little room left for the exclusion clause
to operate. A more sensible and realistic view is
that the parties here expected, even if they did not
like it, that the exclusion of compensation clause
would operate even where the eligibility criteria in
respect of the bid (including the bidder) were not
complied with.

[137] While the Ministry’s conduct was in breach
of Contract A, that conduct was not so extreme as
to engage some overriding and paramount public
interest in curbing contractual abuse as in the Plas-
Tex case. Brentwood was not an outsider to the RFP
process. It was a legitimate competitor. All bidders
knew that the road contract (i.e. Contract B) would
not be performed by the proponent alone. The work
required a large “team” of different trades and per-
sonnel to perform. The issue was whether EAC
would be on the job as a major sub-contractor (to
which Tercon could not have objected) or identified
 with Brentwood as a joint venture “proponent”
with EAC. All bidders were made aware of a certain
flexibility with respect to the composition of any
proponent’s “team”. Section 2.8(b) of the RFP provided
 that if “a material change has occurred to the
Proponent since its qualification under the RFEI,
including if the composition of the Proponent’s
team members has changed, . . . the Ministry may
129
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


request [further information and] . . . reserves the
right to disqualify that Proponent, and reject its
Proposal”. Equally, “[i]f a qualified Proponent is
concerned that it has undergone a material change,
the Proponent can, at its election, make a preliminary
 submission to the Ministry, in advance of the
Closing Date, and before submitting a Proposal. . . .
The Ministry will, within three working days of
receipt of the preliminary submission give a written
 decision as to whether the Proponent is still
qualified to submit a Proposal.”

[138] The RFP issued on January 15, 2001. The
Ministry was informed by Brentwood of a “proposed
 material change to our team’s structure” in
respect of a joint venture with EAC by fax dated
January 24, 2001. From the Ministry’s perspective
, the change was desirable. EAC was a bigger
company, had greater expertise in rock drilling and
blasting (a major part of the contract) and a stronger
balance sheet. EAC was identified in Brentwood’s
amended proposal as a sub-contractor. In the
end, the Ministry did not approve the January 14,
2001 request, presumably because it doubted that
a change in the “composition of the Proponent’s
team’s members” could , according to the terms of
the RFP, include a change in the Proponent itself.

[139] The Ministry did obtain legal advice and
did not proceed in defiance of it. On March 29,
2001, the Ministry noted in an internal e-mail that a
Ministry lawyer (identified in the e-mail) had come
to the conclusion that the joint venture was not an
eligible proponent but advised that Contract B
could lawfully be structured in a way so as to satisfy
 both Brentwood/EAC’s concerns and avoid litigation
 from disappointed proponents.

[140] I do not wish to understate the difference
between EAC as a sub-contractor and EAC as a
joint-venturer. Nor do I discount the trial judge’s
condemnation of the Ministry’s lack of fairness
130


and transparency in making a Contract B which
on its face was at odds with what the trial judge
found to be the true state of affairs. Tercon has
legitimate reason to complain about the Ministry’s
conduct. I say only that based on the jurispru-
dence, the Ministry’s misconduct did not rise to the
level where public policy would justify the court
in depriving the Ministry of the protection of the
exclusion of compensation clause freely agreed to
by Tercon in the contract.
[141] The construction industry in British
Columbia is run by knowledgeable and sophisticated
 people who bid upon and enter government
contracts with eyes wide open. No statute in British
Columbia and no principle of the common law override
 their ability in this case to agree on a tendering
 process including a limitation or exclusion of
remedies for breach of its rules. A contractor who
does not think it is in its business interest to bid on
the terms offered is free to decline to participate.
As Donald J.A. pointed out, if enough contractors
refuse to participate, the Ministry would be forced
to change its approach. So long as contractors are
willing to bid on such terms, I do not think it is the
court’s job to rescue them from the consequences
of their decision to do so. Tercon’s loss of antici-
pated profit is a paper loss. In my view, its claim is
barred by the terms of the contract it agreed to.
V. Disposition
[142]

   Appeal allowed, MCLACHLIN C.J. and BINNIE ,
A BELLA and ROTHSTEIN JJ. dissenting.

  Solicitors for the appellant: McLean &
Armstrong, West Vancouver.

   Solicitor for the respondent: Attorney General
of British Columbia, Victoria.
131
[2010] 1 R.C.S.


   Solicitor for the intervener: Attorney General
of Ontario, Toronto.
